An illustration photo of Bitcoin ( virtual currency ) coins China ’ s crackdown on cryptocurrency trading – a sign of things to come September 20 , 2017 8.26am BST The University of Melbourne Author DIRECTOR OF STUDIES , BANKING AND FINANCE LAW , The University of Melbourne Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The decision to order several Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies exchanges to close shows how much of a they are perceived to be to financial stability and social order in China . The decision to also ban initial coin offerings altogether ( the unregulated means by which funds are raised for a new cryptocurrency venture ) has taken traders and analysts by surprise . China is the world ’ s cryptocurrency market with around 80 % of Bitcoin transactions taking place in yuan . The ( a digital ledger in which digital currency transactions are publicly recorded ) is poised to have a on the future of finance . This recent crackdown suggests the Chinese government is determined to cement its place as a leading rule maker and power-broker in the quickly emerging area of cryptocurrency transactions and exchange . Chinese relationship with bitcoin The Chinese government released a of 60 initial coin offering trading platforms and instructed local agencies to make sure all platforms were listed and closed down . The delayed crackdown is in line with previous practice in China . The Chinese government often adopts a wait-and-see approach to activities that are largely unregulated until the magnitude of the activity becomes clear . The extent of speculative investment and the risk of losses to investors if the bubble bursts motivated the government to intervene in cryptocurrency trading . Read more : In China , the popularity of cryptocurrencies has been boosted by the of controls on money moving out of the country over the past two years . This has lowered the value of the China ’ s currency , the renminbi , as investors seek assets in different denominations and chase higher yields . Cryptocurrencies are also popular because they can be used to transfer funds offshore and circumvent foreign exchange controls . The government is with the of cryptocurrencies and initial coin offerings to perpetrate and disguise fraudulent activity , including money laundering and ponzi type investment schemes . Chinese authorities are anxious to avoid any social unrest in the lead-up to the 19th Party Congress . The effects of the , where the A-share market lost one-third of its value over a period of one month , are still being felt . In some respects , the regulatory intervention in China is mirrored in other countries that have been dragging their heels in coming to terms with cryptocurrencies . It was only in July this year that the US Securities Commission issued a determining that DAO tokens were “ securities ” and must be regulated accordingly . China ’ s own cryptocurrency In January last year , the People ’ s Bank of China issued a notice announcing it would be issuing its own of the renminbi . The notice highlighted the benefits of a government backed digital currency in terms of cost , coverage , convenience and security . Read more : In the initial phase , it ’ s likely that trading in this digital currency will be limited to regulated entities such as banks along similar lines to trading on the conventional foreign exchange markets . By launching its own digital currency , the Chinese government avoids the risks associated with privately-issued cryptocurrencies and ensuring they are not used as a means of circumventing China ’ s strict capital and currency controls . When China introduces its own digital currency ( no formal date has yet been announced ) , the impact on the global economy will be significant . Not only will it challenge the existing global payment systems and establish China as a leading rule maker in this area , it will also enhance the importance of the renminbi as a global reserve currency .
Can cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin survive scrutiny from central banks ? September 19 , 2017 1.50pm BST University of Reading Author Associate Professor , University of Reading Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The future of money looks very different in the world of cryptocurrencies . There is a growing consensus among businesses , investors and countries ( ) that these alternative forms of online money are going to dominate payments in the next decade . There may be agreement on the potential , but quite how regulators and central banks will respond is still up in the air . The combined market value of all cryptocurrencies in circulation reached US $ 170 billion by the end of August 2017 , 850 % higher than at the beginning of the year , according to , a leading cryptocoin prices and market capitalisation tracker website . It is no surprise that this kind of growth sparked much hand-wringing among regulators and central banks , who are still undecided whether cryptocurrencies should be classified as a commodity , an asset or a form of currency . That might seem like an odd discussion to be having . But one of the basic functions of currency is to facilitate transactions in a timely manner . And to protect the security ( the technology behind cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin ) , the processing of Bitcoin transactions is sometimes very slow . Due to restrictions on the limit of Bitcoin transactions which can be completed in a day , it may take a few days to complete a single transaction , rendering the cryptocurrency unable to fulfil the basic function of money at times . Private blockchains can speed up transactions but they are not popular and availability is limited . Money worries The call to better regulate cryptocurrency gained momentum after the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) stating that banks should consider investing in cryptocurrencies : Rapid advances in digital technology are transforming the financial services landscape , creating opportunities and challenges for consumers , service providers and regulators alike . Any wholesale adoption by the banking sector would clearly establish a huge market for cryptocurrencies , but the traffic isn ’ t moving entirely one way . Chinese regulators dealt a huge blow to the crypto market at the beginning of September when the People ’ s Bank of China through Initial Coin Offerings ( ICOs ) . An ICO is a fundraising tool that trades future cryptocoins in exchange for cryptocurrencies of immediate , liquid value . They have become an easy platform for digital currency geeks to raise funds quickly . In simpler terms , ICOs are a crowdfunding platform for future cryptocoins . They have already raised US $ 2.32 billion , . China is getting stricter in general . It that it may ban the trading of virtual currencies on domestic exchanges entirely . If this goes ahead , it will certainly dampen the enthusiasm around the sector . But there always seems to be some better news round the corner , and more oversight may well generate the confidence that can overcome concerns . The Russian finance ministry is pushing to regulate the use of cryptocurrencies in the country , while the central bank has been working on regulation for digital currencies since the beginning of the year . Perhaps the biggest boost for cryptocurrencies came from Finland ’ s central bank economists , who called the infrastructure behind crypctocurrencies such as Bitcoin “ revolutionary ” and . There has also been recognition for cryptocurrencies in countries , which are both implementing polices to legalise cryptocurrencies exchanges . Japan has made it mandatory for Bitcoin exchanges to register with regulators and undergo annual auditing by certified accountants . Singapore ’ s central bank noted that the function of digital tokens went beyond simply being a virtual currency while asserting some oversight . It that ICOs would have to be approved or recognised by the bank or recognised under Singapore ’ s Securities and Futures Act . In the US , the Securities and Exchange Commission echoed that sentiment , as securities and any unregistered offerings could be subject to criminal punishment . Two options This kind of growing acceptance – China aside – is an acknowledgement of the growing popularity of cryptocurrencies as a financial instrument . Looking further ahead , regulators have two options . First , they could implement stricter regimes to ensure cryptocurrency transactions are not related to dark net activities , terrorism financing or money laundering activities . Alternatively , central banks could start issuing their own digital currency known as Central Bank issued Digital Currency ( CBDC ) based on the distributed ledger technology ( DLT ) , the same blockchain technology behind the cryptocurrencies . This raises the possibility of CBDCs destroying the value proposition of existing cryptocurrencies . The Bank of England in the initial discussion while its peers in , and at the all analyse the feasibility of launching digital currencies . The wider discussion on CBDCs is a testimony to the fact that central banks are serious about cryptocurrencies , and in a way competing with their growing popularity . In the worst case scenario for this still fledgling market , central banks could decide to make trading or possessing cryptocurrencies illegal . That would be tough to enforce as there is no single organisation or person that controls cryptocurrencies and transactions don ’ t go through a central clearing house . There is precedent , however . Back in 1933 , the US president , Franklin Roosevelt , made and required all Americans to hand over their cache of gold to the Federal Reserve . If that happens here , then the cryptocurrency market would die a natural death . It all rests now with the central bankers . China has offered a glimpse of a difficult future ; crypto evangelists will hope others continue down the more accommodating path .
Banking sector will be ground zero for job losses from AI and robotics September 12 , 2017 2.06pm BST University of Salford Authors Co-director , Centre for Digital Business , University of Salford Senior Lecturer in Centre for Digital Business , University of Salford Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Deutsche Bank CEO John Cryan has as automation takes hold across the finance sector . Every signal is that he will be proved right very soon . Those roles in finance where the knowledge required is systematic will soon disappear . And it will happen irrespective of how high a level , how highly trained or how experienced the human equivalent may currently be . Regular and repetitive tasks at all levels of an organisation already do not need to be done by humans . The more a job is solely or largely composed of these routines the higher the risk of being replaced by computing power . The warning signs have been out there for a number of years as about artificial intelligence have been tempered with fears about in most sectors of the economy . Many roles have already all but disappeared in the march towards a fully digital economy . Older readers may recall typesetters , typists , and increasingly , switchboard operators and back room postal workers , as work of the last century . And the . Banking on jobs The finance sector was once driven by human judgement and decision making . But slowly , it has changed . One-to-one conversations with your local bank manager were replaced by scripted call centre interactions during the 1990s . Today , increased processing power , massive cloud storage , strong encryption and an increase in the use make possible tasks that had previously been seen as too complex for automation to be done quickly and consistently . Artificial intelligence reduces the need for human work that requires analysis , consistent applications of decisions and judgement calls . These are pivotal actions for many legal and financial activities . Combined , in the background , with blockchain – essentially a publicly shared automated ledger of agreed contracts – arrangements that require some form of trust between two parties will also be able to be completed with little or no human intervention . Blockchain is the basis of every cryptocurrency – forms of money exchanged online . Banks are slowly working towards ways of . While alternative forms of money attract popular headlines it is the automation behind the scenes that is most compelling aspect for the finance sector . By removing the influence of human decision making from as many processes as possible , a fully digital supply chain can be created . As artificial intelligence learns more about the impact and influence of every process each time it happens , a bank ’ s efficiency should continuously improve , and profits increase , with fewer and fewer employees . Protected In this atmosphere of change to the world of work in banking , however , there are some roles that will prove more . Work that is unpredictable or inherently people-focused will survive . Customer service staff will still need to tackle the inevitably complex queries that are the product of the human mind rather than the outcome of algorithms . AI will deal with most enquiries , but will inevitably need to transfer the most cryptic to a human interlocutor . Mortgage decisions , for example , will come as an automatically generated message ; more intricate questions will still require face-to-face conversations . At the other end of the ( pay ) scale senior executives will continue to steer the direction of their individual organisations , although the nature of their work will subtly change to become technology-based decisions . Executives will find themselves choosing an algorithm instead of directly making a high-risk investment decision , or they may end up selecting an artificial intelligence machine rather than interviewing people to become employees . Reduction in the wage bill at other levels of the business and the increasing significance of the few human decisions that need to be made may even assist in justifying their . Inevitable change The traditional banking sector is an obvious area for artificial intelligence and automation to generate competitive advantages for companies . This is a result , in part , of previous reluctance to embrace change . In the late 1990s there was a collective hysteria around and fear of a wholesale shutdown of computers which failed to cope with the millennium date change . That highlighted the sector ’ s uneasy relationship with fast-moving technological change . But even this public panic prompted few immediate , practical changes . Now , mobile app-only banks , with no branches , such as , challenge the traditional banking sector and its human resources legacy . Traditional banks are still largely oriented towards humans doing most of its work . In 2016 , were employed in the finance services sector , the biggest tax contributor to the UK economy and the country ’ s largest exporter . Most predictions claim around 50 % of the jobs in the sector . Depending on who you listen to , this process will take between five and 20 years . The impact of these changes will be felt . There exists a genuine fear that artificial intelligence , robotics and fully digital businesses may contribute to a . Deutsche Bank ’ s CEO is being frank about a future where jobs in banking and elsewhere will become ever more scarce as digital business becomes a reality . This realisation has reinvigorated calls for a ( UBI ) or a social dividend in the UK and elsewhere . The proposal has found as a means to maintain personal levels of prosperity in this new world . Crucially too , the UBI would seek to maintain the foundations of the current Western economy in an era of increasingly fully automated digital businesses – a goal , if achieved , which might also just about keep the current finance and banking sector in business .
Are cryptocurrencies a dream come true for ? September 12 , 2017 3.17am BST University of North Carolina – Greensboro Author Professor of Management , University of North Carolina – Greensboro Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list More cryptocurrencies appear all the time . When malicious software takes over , and demands a ransom to decode the information , regular , and slam to a halt . Sometimes security researchers release a fix that allows computer owners to , but many people are forced to pony up to free their data . In 2016 , the FBI estimated that the – and that ’ s only the cases . All that money isn ’ t paid in cash . Before digital currencies existed , extortionists asked victims to send money by more formal transfer companies like Western Union or make deposits to bank accounts . Those were easily traced . Today , ransomware attacks demand payment in bitcoin and its ilk , systems praised by supporters for their transaction speed and . In researching cybercrime and cybersecurity for more than a decade , I have found that obtaining cybercrime proceeds is often the . In this regard , diffusion of cryptocurrencies is a major development that enables cybercriminals to achieve their goals . In fact , the escalation of ransomware attacks and the increasing prominence of cryptocurrencies may be connected . Some companies have invested in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies specifically so they can . That helps contribute to the rapid growth in use and value of e-currencies . And as digital currencies become more common , ransomware attackers will have an easier time hiding their illicit transactions among the growing crowd of legitimate transfers . Using cryptocurrencies in cyber extortion The extortionists behind most ransomware attacks demand payments in bitcoin , the most popular cryptocurrency . The WannaCry attackers demanded per computer ; the Petya ransomware before providing a code that would let victims decrypt their data . Not many people actually pay , though : WannaCry victims paid only . If everyone infected had paid , the criminals would have received at least $ 60 million . It translated to a payout rate of 0.4 percent . Even fewer paid the Petya perpetrators : They got , totaling barely over 4 bitcoins , or about $ 18,200 . Other attacks are more successful : In June , a ransomware attack hit owned by South Korean web hosting firm Nayana . More than 3,400 of the company ’ s customers were affected – mostly small businesses running their websites on Nayana ’ s equipment . Nayana itself stepped up , taking loans to in bitcoins to the attackers , saying it had . The attackers don ’ t always need to make much money to be effective . Many cybersecurity researchers believe that Petya attacks were carried out rather than for financial gains . But ransomware has a much higher payout rate than other common cybercrimes . One study found that for every 12.5 million spam emails sent promoting a fake online pharmacy , the . That ’ s a success rate of about 0.000008 percent . They make a lot of money – – only by sending out enormous numbers of messages . Trusting cyberthieves ? One reason cybercrime success rates are low is that victims don ’ t trust the extortionists to once they get paid . In 2016 , about a quarter of the organizations that paid ransoms were . The WannaCry attackers were particularly bad : Their system was labor-intensive , requiring the criminals to manually connect payments with encrypted files before letting victims decode them . In fact , a made it almost impossible to decrypt a paying victim ’ s data . More sophisticated methods do exist , including those that incorporate what are called “ , ” another aspect of some cryptocurrency systems that runs a particular program as part of completing a transaction . In those ransomware attacks , making payment a victim needs to decrypt and recover hijacked files . Preparing for future ransomware The fear of ransomware is growing . In mid-2016 , a study found that had bought bitcoins just in case they needed to pay off ransomware attackers . More than 35 percent of large firms , those with more than 2,000 employees , reported being to unlock critical files . Even in case of a future ransomware attack . At the same time , bitcoin and other similar systems are becoming much more popular . In 2016 , the total value of all cryptocurrencies was . By August 2017 , that number had increased more than eight-fold , . The World Economic Forum projects cryptocurrencies will hold . These cycles are self-reinforcing : The more transactions there are involving cryptocurrencies , the harder it will be to . As a result , cybercriminals will use cryptocurrencies more often – forcing their victims ( and even potential targets ) to invest in cryptocurrencies , too .
Worth reading : Bitcoin , BlackBerry , time travel and other outcomes August 18 , 2017 12.03am BST University of Toronto Author Professor of Strategic Management , University of Toronto Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Editor ’ s note : The Conversation Canada asked our academic authors to share some recommended reading . In this instalment , Joshua Gans , an economist who wrote about how an , offers up new picks along with a few of his favourite books . Before Babylon , Beyond Bitcoin Before Babylon , Beyond Bitcoin By David Birch ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2017 . London Publishing Partnership ) David Birch ’ s previous book , Identity is the New Money , was fantastic in the way it drew a relationship between the money you have and your identity in society . This follow-up includes an analysis of such as . Money is a deeper issue than many economists appreciate . Indeed , it is something economists ignore by assumption : Money sits in the background without an impact itself on real economic decisions . That ’ s why I always value alternative perspectives that make me think . I ’ m looking forward to reading this one but it will have to wait until I have a good chunk of time to get the most out of it . Losing the Signal Losing the Signal By Sean Silcoff and Jacquie McNish ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2015 . Flatiron Books . ) This book , written by two Canadian journalists , is the definitive business history of BlackBerry , maker of what was once a must-have namesake smartphone . It traces the history of the Canadian technology giant ’ s “ extraordinary rise and spectacular fall , ” to quote the subtitle . For example , the book offers unparalleled insight into how disruption can be caused by internal decisions . I believe it ’ s a must-read for anyone seeking to understand disruption and why successful firms fail . On Intelligence On Intelligence By Jeff Hawkins with Sandra Blakeslee ( Non-fiction . Hardcover , 2004 . St. Martin ’ s Press . ) is the inventor of the PalmPilot electronic assistant that made a pocket computer an essential personal tool and paved the way for the BlackBerry , iPhone and other mobile computers . His book is 13 years old but has as its central thesis — that intelligence is all about predictive ability — is now at the centre of the recent explosion in machine learning and artificial intelligence . All Our Wrong Todays All Our Wrong Todays By Elan Mastai ( Fiction . Hardcover , 2017 . Doubleday Canada . ) An interesting time travel journey wrapped up in a family drama where consequences remain consequences . It is also mostly set in Toronto , making it nicely familiar for Canadian readers . One of the things I appreciated about this book is that it deals with a big time travel problem : How can you go back in time and end up in the same physical place you started when the Earth is always moving through space — on its axis , around the sun , in the solar system , in the Milky Way — while the galaxy itself is moving through the universe ? That alone makes All Our Wrong Todays more thoughtful than the usual offerings on this subject . [ Editor ’ s note : this book in his reading list . ] The Plot Against America By Philip Roth ( Fiction . Hardcover , 2004 . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . ) An alternative history in which , the famous aviator , wins the presidency in 1940 and keeps the United States out of the Second World War . Suffice to say , for anyone living in 2016 and 2017 observing U.S. politics today , there is something chilling about this book given that Roth wrote it a decade ago . You will recognize the trends and concerns that perhaps make up the American mindset that leave its democracy vulnerable to populism .
South Africa needs a sensible debate about its Reserve Bank . Here ’ s a start July 11 , 2017 7.47pm BST University of the Witwatersrand Authors Distinguished Professor and Derek Schrier and Cecily Cameron Chair in Development Economics , School of Economics and Business Sciences , University of the Witwatersrand PhD candidate Development Economics , School of Economics and Business Sciences , University of the Witwatersrand Disclosure statement Partners provides support as a hosting partner of The Conversation AFRICA . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Stable food prices are a central issue for South Africa ’ s Reserve Bank . But should it be doing more to protect the poor ? Debates on monetary policy in South Africa over the last couple of decades seem to have come from a madhouse . First , in the 1990s the country had old discredited rammed down its throat . This was done with little regard for alternative progressive ideas and little or no democratic debate or public participation . And then recently the country ’ s Public Protector , Busisiwe Mkhwebane released that made sweeping populist recommendations about the South Africa Reserve Bank . The report favoured revising the country ’ s constitution and a binding recommendation for a monetary policy regime that excludes any reference to price stability . A mandate like this simply doesn ’ t exist in any comparable country with a well-developed private banking system . To put the report in context we want to focus on basic monetary policy principles that have been debated for centuries by serious thinkers and scholars . We also explore how South Africa can move the debate forward constructively and responsibly . Broadly , thinkers on monetary policy can be considered on a scale with advocates on the one side , and those concerned that money and banking must serve the productive economy – let ’ s call them advocates – on the other . We locate ourselves unambiguously on the “ serve-society ” side of the debate . We agree with who served in the British Treasury in 1695 , who said that money supply must serve society . in the 19th Century , , the trade union leader and in 20th Century , concurred . Unlike Mkhwebane ’ s report , these economists , particularly Keynes and Minsky , understood that currency and money markets under capitalism have a nasty tendency to be unstable . That ’ s why the regulatory and lender of last resort function of the Reserve Bank is so vital . ( When the operations of the inter-banking lending market cease to operate , the lender of last resort is the entity – usually a Central Bank – that has sufficient liquidity to lend to banks short of funds . ) has performed these roles moderately well for almost a century . The country hasn ’ t had a systemic banking crises since the formation of the Reserve Bank in 1921 . Experts in the field , find that South Africa is among the most stable top 13 banking systems in the world . The Reserve Bank should take credit for much of that . That doesn ’ t mean that it ’ s beyond criticism which is why a serious debate is needed . The debate doesn ’ t need to rely on the ideas of fringe adventurers and crackpots . The country has a wealth of intellectual talent on monetary and central banking policy inside and outside its universities that straddle the ideological spectrum . The country ’ s public intellectuals in the unions and in civil society organisations have excellent ideas on central banking and monetary policy . Ordinary citizens should be drawn in too . One thing is clear : things can not remain as they are because so much is changing in the world of central banking and in economic life . The two camps tend to view banking as just another business , best left to the free market . Historically sound money economists have preferred deregulation of the banking system . But since the spectacular collapse of thousands of banks in many parts of the world in the , and the banking and financial crises after 2008 , very few now propose abolishing the lender of last resort function of central banks . Sound money economists now want central bankers bound by rules , rather than allowing for discretion . But they still focus on the virtues of trade and private finance . For their part , “ serve-society ” advocates worry about production , employment and growth . Keynes – by no measure a crank or a crackpot – was very much in favour of adjusting monetary and fiscal policy where necessary . He was a passionate advocate of sound banking and financial regulation because he understood the inherent instability of capitalism . He warned that getting it wrong could massively increase poverty and unemployment . In 1933 he three safeguards when shifting economic policy priorities : Firstly , don ’ t be doctrinaire . Secondly , he maintained that “ the economic transition of a society is a thing to be accomplished slowly ” . And thirdly , don ’ t allow “ intolerance and the stifling of instructed criticism ” . For those not in public office he offered this final piece of advice : Words ought to be a little wild – for they are the assault of thought on the unthinking . A changing world Conventional notions of what central banks are , and of what they should do , face a number of . For example , the processes of technological innovation , including the growth of , are rapidly reshaping some of the core functions of central banks . And over the last three decades a number of economic factors have forced central banks to . They ’ ve had to do so to align their functions with other states in the wake of greater economic regionalisation , the creation of and the establishment of regional central banks . The also shook confidence in the ability of central banks to use their reputedly vast capacity and skills to predict and head off the crisis . This has been particularly true as far as their regulatory responsibilities to promote financial stability are concerned . As pointed out by Princeton Professor and former deputy-Governor of the Banque du France , , a return to the status quo ante in respect of central bank policy is neither desirable nor indeed feasible . Despite this warning the status quo ante is being defended all over the world as if nothing has changed , and as if all is well in our economies . Let the debate begin After the release of the Public Protector ’ s report the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank , Lesetja Kganyago , offered the potential space to begin a serious about South African monetary policy aimed at creating a more inclusive and prosperous society and economy . But , he warned , such a discussion would have to be based on “ evidence and sound analysis ” . In our view ideas must come from across the ideological spectrum . And they must be debated in legitimate and properly structured forums . One place to begin the discussion would be Parliament ’ s Portfolio Committee on Finance . Other structures – such as the Reserve Bank ’ s Monetary Policy Forums ( as proposed by the governor ) and forums led by business , labour and civil society organisations as well as universities – need to keep up the momentum . There must be no place for defensive postures , arrogance or condescension . The debate must be guided by one overriding objective : to improve the quality of life of the many South Africans for whom the end of apartheid has brought no real material change ? It must consider the impact of change on employment , investment and growth .
Bitcoin ’ s central appeal could also be its biggest weakness July 7 , 2017 12.01pm BST Lancaster University Author Senior lecturer , Lancaster University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin reached a huge new peak in value in June 2017 , when one unit of the virtual currency ( £2,208 ) , up from around US $ 600 just a year earlier . people worldwide are now thought to own bitcoin and accept it for goods ( not counting all those using it to sell drugs and other illegal items on the black market ) . Part of bitcoin ’ s appeal for many of its users is the by any government or bank . Instead it relies on a technology known as blockchain to underpin and secure transactions . But research my colleagues and I have conducted suggests that the lack of any social trust in the way blockchain operates poses a challenge for bitcoin ’ s further spread . a public database that records digital transactions . These are validated by computers working within a worldwide network that solve complex coded problems . Whereas traditional bank transactions are authorised by financial institutions and controlled by governments through taxation and contracts between parties with known identities , blockchain is decentralised , unregulated and anonymous . In our we found that these features because of increasing distrust of financial institutions and governments . The technology empowers people to regain control over their money , with over where and when they can send it . But our findings also indicate that two core aspects of blockchain ’ s design – the fact that transactions are anonymous and irreversible – pose to the social trust among its users . Anonymity has an obvious appeal for people looking to avoid government control . And irreversible transactions were built into blockchain ’ s original design as a positive feature to address banks ’ privilege of reversing transactions , even when the contract states that they were final . But in practice , these features are a problem for many people . Most people are used to relying on the reputation of a seller to decide whether or not to buy from them – and the ability of the financial and legal system to help them if something goes wrong . But neither of these things are possible through blockchain . Paper trails have their advantages Most transactions don ’ t just involve moving bitcoin from one electronic wallet to another . In practice , they are often part of a larger , two-way transactions where both parties send and receive assets such as bitcoins , real world currency or physical goods . The issue is that the blockchain only records the movement of bitcoin , not the movement of other currencies or goods . Because there is no authority to complain to , this raises a major risk that users could fall prey to dishonest traders who fail to deliver their side of the deal . In our latest study , we interviewed 20 bitcoin users recruited from five online groups from Malaysia , most of them with more than two years experience of using bitcoins . indicates that more than 50 % of participants would prefer blockchain ’ s transactions to be regulated and identifiable , so that transactions can be either reversed or the dishonest trader legally sanctioned . This shows there is a tension between the freedom and empowerment of blockchain ’ s unregulated nature , and the lack of security that most people are accustomed to receiving from traditional financial institutions . If this is not addressed , such tension may limit the spread of bitcoin beyond its current base . It could even reduce the number of bitcoin users involved in such two-way transactions , as more people become aware of the risks of dishonest traders . In contrast , the use of blockchain for one-way transactions such as remittance payments will continue to grow , as they are less affected by dishonest traders . What can be done ? Even bitcoin ’ s current users still operate largely under the traditional mindset of centralised and regulated currencies . Bitcoin advocates may need to find ways to encourage users to develop a new mental approach to unregulated blockchain technology . But developers could also build tools to address some of bitcoin users ’ concerns . For example , there may be a way to record whether the real-world elements of bitcoin transactions are also verified , authorised and stored on the public ledger . Electronic wallets could be linked to a reputation file that users could view before agreeing to a deal , much like sites such as eBay allow consumers to rate sellers . And new mechanisms built on top of the irreversible blockchain protocol could enable individual two-way transactions to be reversed . Without doing something to tackle these challenges , the very thing that caught people ’ s attention about bitcoin in the first place could end up stifling its growth and eventually consigning it to history .
shutterstock . Alternative currencies are the future : why it matters for development July 2 , 2017 9.37am BST University of Pretoria Author Full Professor of Political Economy , University of Pretoria Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a partner of The Conversation AFRICA . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list When I began to teach in 2012 , I decided to start my course with an analysis of how money affects social order . What my students found particularly fascinating was the then-nascent world of cryptocurrencies , which I described at length as a crucial feature in the future of money . Some colleagues criticised my approach . They accused me of indirectly encouraging students to invest in what they saw as a shady , crime-ridden financial underworld . But I was simply exposing young minds to a fast-evolving , complex phenomenon that in my view would have a major impact on power distribution in the global economy . Behind most cryptocurrencies is a simple technology known as “ ” , a system residing in multiple computers that allows for peer-to-peer financial ledger recording of all transactions occurring in a network . This results in a transparent open-access registry of monetary flows which makes the intermediation of banking authorities unnecessary . Thus it challenges the conventional belief that money can only work through central planning . As I explain in my book , , money systems are undergoing an unprecedented transition from centralised authority to decentralised networks . Conventional money is managed by states and banks , with users on the receiving end of monetary policy decisions . By contrast , most alternative currencies are peer-to-peer . That means they are managed by users themselves and do not require intermediaries . Some of them have global outreach thanks to digital technology , while others are locally based . Take BitCoin , the most popular peer-to-peer currency in the world , with a market capitalisation . A person buying the equivalent of $ 1 in BitCoin in 2009 would now possess roughly $ 25 million . One BitCoin is currently equivalent in value to two ounces of gold . Other rising stars include Ethereum , Litecoin and Ripple . Taking the world by storm Many of these currencies remain quite volatile in the short term . Their upward and downward swings reach over 10 % of the value on a weekly basis . But the long-term trend is impressive . States are warming up to them . In April 2017 , Japan as a legal payment method for retail markets . After threatening digital currencies last year , the Russian government took a U-turn . President Vladimir Putin and committed to recognising cryptocurrencies in 2018 . Following an initial freeze , the People ’ s Bank of China in BitCoin in June 2017 , catapulting the currency to new heights . In the US , cryptocurrencies are becoming increasingly as both a method of payment and store of value . The Australian government will soon make it easier for new innovative digital currency businesses , exempting traders and investors from goods and services tax . It ’ s clear that cryptocurrencies will in the near future become much more common as methods of payment for a wide range of purchases , from online shopping to the local supermarket . Developing countries are leapfrogging Developing economies , too , are opening up to cryptocurrencies . In , BitCoin has become the leading parallel currency . It provides millions of citizens with an opportunity to perform transactions and generate livelihoods , including buying food and other basic necessities in a country where official money is worth almost zero . It also allows them to purchase goods from overseas , overcoming ever-stricter capital controls . In East Africa , local innovators have introduced cryptocurrency systems to support cross-border transactions , as exemplified by initiatives like . In , cryptocurrencies are becoming particularly popular . In , local traders and activists believe this new money presents an opportunity to democratise the economy . This is propelled by the fact that people in Nigeria have been failed by conventional money . According to my colleague Verengai Mabika , founder of in Zimbabwe , the collapse of his country ’ s formal financial system has made BitCoin an attractive alternative . This is especially the case for online payments , which are restricted by banks , and for remittances , which constitute the backbone of the economy . A growing number of Zimbabweans are also using cryptocurrencies as a saving mechanism ( 37 % of all Bitfinance customers use it for that purpose ) , Verengai tells me . This is after the massive loss of personal savings during the hyperinflation period of 2008 , which led to the collapse of the country ’ s banks . Decentralisation and local economic development The decentralisation of money is indeed at the core of this new trend , with potential repercussions in other fields . For instance , is designed as a smart contract platform , that is a trading system completely based on peer-to-peer property rights . was developed as the preferential currency for cooperatives , social economies and fair trade networks around the world . Cryptocurrencies are just the tip of an iceberg . According to , there are over 6,000 complementary currencies in the world , over 50 times the number of conventional money systems . Most of these are user-controllled and are interest-free . One can not make money by simply trading in them . Hoarding makes no sense in this new world . This is because value is not in the accumulation but in the exchange . The scope is often limited to certain territories or types of transactions ( for example , personal care , sustainable mobility and local trade ) . This creates an incentive to support local economic development and forms of exchange that are valued by communities of users . , a network of local currencies which I studied when I was a researcher in Germany , has proliferated throughout the country . It has become the world ’ s largest system of local currencies , supporting small businesses and empowering communities . In the near future , we will have a variety of money with different qualities and different purposes . This will make economies more resilient against shocks and will support more equitable and sustainable development , by putting users in the driver seat and reinforcing local economic development . As demonstrates , a combination of regional , national and local currencies could also be the best way forward for the European Union , engulfed by its monolithic and unsustainable euro , and for any other process of regional integration , from Africa to other continents .
An Indian man displays new currency notes of 2,000 Indian rupee . Cash is falling out of fashion – will it disappear forever ? June 26 , 2017 2.07am BST Tufts University Author Senior Associate Dean , International Business & Finance , Tufts University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list On June 27 , the . Former U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker once described it as the “ . ” But today , the cash that ATMs dispense may be on the endangered list . Cash is being displaced in so many ways that it ’ s hard to keep track . There are credit cards and electronic payments ; apps such as Venmo , PayPal and Square Cash ; mobile payments services ; cryptocurrencies that operate outside the purview of central banks ; and localized offerings such as Kenya ’ s mPesa , India ’ s Paytm and Bangladesh ’ s bKash . These innovations are encouraging cashlessness across communities worldwide . It ’ s reasonable to expect cash to follow the path of other goods that have been replaced by digital alternatives , such as photos , music and movies . Will cash – and the ATMs that dispense it – experience a “ Blockbuster ” moment and disappear from our neighborhoods ? Not so fast . Cash will likely become less popular , thanks to the high cost of using cash and the growing array of alternatives . But I expect it will remain with us forever . The future will be “ less cash , ” rather than cashless . The cost of cash As of 2013 , approximately . Reliance on cash is quite uneven across the world . While Singapore , the Netherlands , France , Sweden and Switzerland are among , in Malaysia , Saudi Arabia , Peru and Egypt , only 1 percent of transactions are cashless . Even some highly advanced countries , such as Japan , are still highly reliant on cash . relative to EU countries . In 2015 , cash usage in the U.S. represented 13.1 percent of its GDP , whereas it represented just 7.1 percent in France and 4.5 percent in Switzerland . Concerns about social equity offer one motivation for lawmakers to push for cashless alternatives . My colleague and I have studied the , with a particular focus on the U.S. , Mexico , Egypt and India . Our shows that the poor and those with less access to institutions bear a disproportionate share of these costs of using cash . In the U.S. , for example , cash usage imposes a regressive tax on consumers , with the highest impact on people who do not have an account with a bank . that the unbanked pay four times more in fees to access their money than those with bank accounts . They also pay US $ 4 higher fees per month for cash access on average than those with formal financial services . Such fees include those charged for payday lending , buy-here-pay-here auto loans and check cashing . The unbanked have a five times higher risk of paying cash access fees on payroll and EBT cards . Poorer consumers also have to spend far more time getting cash . On average , Americans spend 28 minutes a month traveling to get cash , but that time isn ’ t evenly distributed . People who don ’ t use a bank spend about five minutes longer getting to the place where they can get cash , and unemployed people spent nearly nine minutes more . In the meantime , other scholars have argued for the benefits of a “ less cash ” society . has argued that eliminating higher-denomination banknotes can prevent currency from being used to fund illegal activities . A world without cash A combination of public and private initiatives are currently chipping away at the global predominance of cash , with some countries moving more quickly than others . , already high on the cashlessness scale , may become the first country to come close to a truly cashless state . Sweden ’ s history in banks promoting cash alternatives dates back to the 1960s , with digital bank transfers used to pay wages . Cards also become more popular in the 1990s , when banks also started charging a fee for checks . The app , Swish , developed by the major banks , is widely used today for digital money transfers by nearly half the population . Many businesses discourage use of cash , and retailers are legally allowed to refuse cash . In several other countries , governments are experimenting with innovative digital alternatives . In 2012 , the Royal Canadian Mint launched project , recently handed over to the private sector . The plan is to store cash on computer chips , enabling the transfer of money between chips through encrypted messages . In some countries , the private sector has led the way , creating “ less cash ” societies in the unlikeliest of places . Consider Somaliland , one of the poorest countries in the world . It stands at the forefront of a mobile payment revolution with . At over 30 mobile payment transactions a month on average , the average citizen of Somaliland is far ahead of the rest of the world ’ s average of 8.5 such transactions per capita per month . Perhaps the most dramatic nudge toward “ less cash ” was experienced recently in India . Last November , the Indian government made a high-risk , high-stakes move by demonetizing the 500 and 1,000 rupee banknotes , in effect . Their initial aim was to root out corruption and illegal activity funded by cash . New 500 and 2,000 rupee banknotes were issued , so consumers had to go to a bank and exchange their demonetized currency . In a country that is , this move led to disrupted enterprises , unpaid wages and long lines at banks . Mobile wallet players were the unqualified winners of the decision , with market leader Paytm claiming . However , despite the surge in mobile payments after demonetization , cash in India remains resilient . In March , five months after demonetization , were actually 0.6 percent higher than a year earlier . The future of cash What explains the resilience of cash , despite its costs and a growing array of alternatives ? Cash is unique among payment instruments in that anyone can transact , any time , any place , with no third parties involved . With this freedom comes strong privacy protection . Currency neither knows nor cares who holds it or when and where a transaction occurred . People have a visceral sense of security when they have cash with them . Much of this sentiment was uncovered in our spanning multiple countries . These thresholds will , of course , evolve as our societies become more digitally native . However , old habits and perceptions take a long time to turn over . Some merchants will resist the costs of new equipment or fees that accompany cash alternatives . Cash is also , while with digital transactions there ’ s always concerns about hacking and fraud . So , no matter where we are in the world , let us celebrate the ATM ’ s half-century of service . The human connection with cash will be hard to break . Though cash may become less popular , rest assured that there will always be someone who will stop you in the street asking for directions to the nearest ATM .
Price hikes in Ether and Bitcoin aren ’ t the signs of a bubble June 19 , 2017 9.01pm BST RMIT University Authors Professor of Economics , RMIT University Principal Research Fellow , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The change in the price of crypto-currencies , like Bitcoin , and other crypto-assets are due to investors realising the value . When there is a rapid growth in any of the crypto-currencies and assets such as Bitcoin , Ether , Zcash and others , many will call it out as a . Indeed , on a relatively short time scale it clearly looks like a . The entire currently stands at around US $ 100 billion ; it was US $ 60 billion one month ago . But Bitcoin was worth 1/100 of a US cent in June of 2009 , 7 cents in June 2010 , and US $ 7 in June of 2012 . Recently all eyes were on Ether . Over a 90 day period , Ether appreciated twice as quickly as Bitcoin did in late 2013 , when Bitcoin crashed to around 35 % of it ’ s highest value . Aside from the 2013 crash , Bitcoin has experienced smaller crashes many times since , but is now worth double its 2013 high . In the longer term , these are fluctuations around a strong growth trend . Crashes will cause some to abandon the field . But signals of longer term growth in these crypto-currencies and assets point to a possible emergence of a new type of market , through the building of a new economic infrastructure . Ether is the token of the , a platform that runs “ smart contracts ” through a distributed online ledger that records transactions . It ’ s second only to the crypto-currency Bitcoin in price . Some believe it will one day overtake Bitcoin ( a process dubbed “ ” ) . Price hikes not the sign of a bubble Fundamental aspects of the technology that underpins crypto-currencies and assets are causing people to re-imagine , and then enact , new ways of creating and exchanging value online . The key difference between Bitcoin and Ethereum is that you can use Bitcoin for payments , but you can use Ether to automate any number of processes using . While many use cases for Ethereum are still at the proof-of-concept stage , it is now attracting the attention of major banks , businesses and , all interested in the potential of the technology to provide greater efficiency and transparency in transactions . That normalisation has collapsed the implicit risk premium attached to this technology . Venture capitalist Albert Wenger describes the current activity in crypto-currencies and assets as “ ” . To explain what this is , take the example of the underlying internet and web protocols ( TCPI/IP and HTTP ) , used to build and run websites . These are not able to store value - therefore they are “ thin protocols ” in Wenger ’ s terminology . So instead , people invest in companies that make software ( applications ) and hardware that rely on these protocols . Companies such as Google and Facebook made a fortune by collecting and storing data generated by users through their online interactions . Meanwhile , users , and the developers who created internet and web protocol , received nothing in return . Blockchain is a “ fat protocol ” because it can be monetised , including incentives for developers but also for users . For example , the creator of JavaScript and co-founder of Mozilla , recently released an Ethereum-based web browser through which users can be paid for the attention they give to advertisements . What is making crypto-assets and currencies appear bubbly is the way in which many of these new platforms and applications have raised money through what are called . An initial coin offering ( a word play on ‘ initial public offering ’ ) is a mechanism by which developers sell the tokens associated with their platform to the public . Depending on the structure of the offering , buyers can usually then trade the tokens , creating secondary markets . As the founder of Ethereum , Vitalik Buterin , has noted , no-one has figured out the . This could be due to the immaturity of the Ethereum platform and ecosystem ( which started development in 2013 and went live only in 2015 ) . What we ’ re observing here is a new economic infrastructure being built and coming online . In tweets on Tuesday , Buterin himself from initial coin offerings , stating he would no longer agree to be an advisor . So while the current speculation in crypto-assets should make us pause , this is not speculative . It is speculative like building a new city , in that infrastructure needs to be developed first before you get to see who moves there . A further point to note is that investment bubbles are actually for building new technologies because of the way they concentrate speculative resources on a new technology to facilitate exploration . There is an enormous effort proceeding to building new crypto businesses and infrastructure on the Ethereum platform . If this platform does indeed begin to carry large parts of the global economy as predicted by , a business consultancy , then it ’ s still massively undervalued . These comments should not be construed as offering personal financial advice .
What ’ s holding up the blockchain ? June 8 , 2017 8.10am BST Updated June 9 , 2017 3.17am BST University of Technology Sydney Author Lecturer in Commercial Equity and Disruptive Technologies and the Law , University of Technology Sydney Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies are still the only usecase for the blockchain . It ’ s not technology or regulation holding back - software that stores and transfers value or data across the internet - we just haven ’ t figured out the next big use-case . released this week by the CSIRO ’ s Data61 not only inject some well-researched gravitas into the conversation , they also provide insight into why some of the major blockchain projects have stalled . Since 2015 , , , and all over the world have raised billions of dollars to explore the blockchain . But the only really successful , scaleable use of the blockchain remains cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin . Bitcoins currently trade at almost , with a total market cap of A $ 61.4 billion . Think of the blockchain as a type of transparent spreadsheet or “ public ledger ” . When someone transfers a Bitcoin , for example , the transaction is verified by “ miners ” , encrypted and a “ block ” is added to the spreadsheet . Mining takes a lot of computing power , and so miners are incentivised to participate in the system with a reward of bitcoin . It ’ s finding a way to put all these pieces together for purposes other than cryptocurrencies that has yet to be figured out . Because of all the computing power required to verify and encrypt new blocks , is expensive and consumes a lot of electricity . For this reason , a blockchain should only be used if it solves particular problems . For example , a blockchain could allow users to see each other ’ s ledgers and transactions , negating the need for a trusted third party to manage risk . The blockchain itself , through sophisticated cryptography , would provide privacy and trust . Conversely , if there is already a central third party managing trust between users and verifying transactions ( something banks already do for consumers ) , then a blockchain is probably not needed at all . Failing that , a sophisticated database or expert system would be a cheaper and simpler alternative . Opportunities and risks The describe some of the possible opportunities for the blockchain in Australia , including monitoring the outbreak of pests or animal and plant diseases , border surveillance , tracking intellectual property , and identity systems that provide greater certainty over entitlements , benefits , and tax obligations . The reports also identify some of the risks . The risks include both business and technical risks . For example , public ledgers do not afford privacy and blockchains generally are not suitable for storing large volumes of high speed data . Bitcoin ’ s blockchain has been suffering from for more than a year . Finding a solution is a priority for any developers wanting to attract the number of users needed to make running a network profitable . The use of blockchain in financial transactions also poses problems for compliance with , which requires that anyone providing financial services ( for example ) must satisfy themselves as to the identity of their client or customer . These shortcomings may explain why a number of high-profile blockchain projects have recently stalled . For example , last week , the Bank of Canada that its blockchain project , Jasper , is not yet fit to handle settlements . Citing transparency and privacy issues , the bank found that the benefits of using blockchain did not outweigh the risks . But risk is not the only reason that blockchain projects are stalling . In February 2017 , the of banks and technologists announced after more than 18 months of investment , innovation , and testing , that they would not be using blockchain for their project because they did not need it . Meanwhile , in a delivered to the Africa Blockchain Conference in March 2017 , Andreas Antonopoulos warned that many recent “ blockchain ” projects are fraudulent attempts to raise capital under the guise of innovation and disruptive technologies . The blockchain ’ s holy grail While bitcoin has proven what the blockchain can do , the technology still needs a killer app to justify the hype . The most likely contender is currently a “ ” . Smart contracts are programmable transactions with complex internal logic that can interact with internet-enabled devices and other smart contracts . At this time , the problem with smart contracts is that they are susceptible to manipulation . What is needed to test the capacity of the blockchain is a small-scale low-stakes low-risk smart contract that ( for example ) regulates energy consumption , manages permissions , or ensures payment on supply . Data61 ’ s lists some contenders , but first we need to manage the risk of fraud , breach of privacy , and blockchain bloat . Once these risks have been reduced to nil or negligible , the real work can resume .
Bitcoin rich kids in Puerto Rico : crypto utopia or ? February 14 , 2018 3.06pm GMT Anglia Ruskin University Trinity College Dublin Authors Lecturer in Accounting and Finance , Anglia Ruskin University Professor of International Finance and Commodities , Trinity College Dublin Disclosure statement Partners and provide funding as members of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrency entrepreneurs have moved to Puerto Rico to build a crypto utopia – – where they plan to pay little in taxes . The crypto expats also hope to demonstrate how the city of the future will look with used for most transactions alongside the development of a new digital cryptocurrency . But it ’ s less clear about whose future – the few or the many – will be the driving force for change on the . Puerto Rico was devastated by last year ’ s and , with , it desperately needs investment to rebuild the island ’ s infrastructure . Puerto Rico was already before the calamity . It goes some way to explaining why local authorities are cautiously welcoming the arrival of cryptocurrency entrepreneurs on the island . But at what cost ? The term crypto-colonialism isn ’ t new . It was by Michael Herzfeld , but had nothing to do with cryptocurrencies – the bitcoin network didn ’ t come into existence until 2009 . Crypto-colonialism originally referred to countries , such as Greece and Thailand , seeking to acquire political independence at the expense of massive economic dependence . And it used the original meaning of the word “ crypto ” – concealed , hidden or secret . Such countries are nominally independent , but their national culture is refashioned to suit foreign models . The term colonialism in this sense is not overt at the point of a gun , but covert through the subversion of norms and cultures . Notably , this definition of crypto-colonialism remains applicable to the socioeconomic consequences of crypto utopia . Crypto land There is a deep link between . Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin rely on a decentralised , extralegal and unregulated approach . But while the crypto billionaires will enjoy their Caribbean playground , poorer locals with little knowledge of the technology will be excluded . The mostly male entrepreneurs , who moved to Puerto Rico last year and plan to do more than create a cryptocurrency bank , will perhaps bring crypto libertarian ideas to the island . Their vision is similar to another would-be crypto utopia , the Free Republic of Liberland , which claims to be a “ micronation ” camped on the western bank of the Danube river . It as its “ national ” currency . Back on Sol , the wealthy crypto expats want to use the blockchain system for decentralised elections and even to issue citizenship ID . But we doubt that locals who are fighting poverty will be enthused by these ideas . This behaviour reeks of – the use of a natural or economic crisis to reshape and mould a society into one which entrenches a libertarian , hypercapitalistic worldview . When you are and feel ignored , any offer of help can seem a good lifeline with little thought for the consequences . Fight the power Crypto utopias can also cause severe environmental damage . Puerto Rico remains in a after , making the idea of Sol simply impractical . One bitcoin transaction 215 kilowatt-hours ( KWh ) , enough power to supply dozens of households on the island when the grid was at full capacity . The annual for increased from 9.5 terawatt-hours ( TWh ) per year to 48 TWh in the last 12 months – 2.5 times higher than Puerto Rico ’ s total consumption of 19 TWh . Resources and infrastructure , post-Hurricane Maria , are too stretched to support cryptocurrency mining on the island . Crypto rich kids made their fortune on the rapid growth of cryptocurrency markets – which are problematic due to their idiosyncratic risks . It ’ s a game for wealthy people who can cash out early and lock in gains , having been the developers of the . This is – those who get in early do well , those who cash in late do poorly . Our shows that cryptocurrency prices are relatively isolated from the shocks transmitted from other assets , such as gold and equities . But cryptocurrency prices are deeply interlinked with each other , so a fall in the price of bitcoin affects other virtual currencies . If bitcoin can ride out its latest , then it ’ s likely that crypto-colonialism will slowly spread around the globe . Crypto libertarians – if they follow the Sol model – could focus on those parts of the world that have been ravaged by earthquakes , tsunamis , hurricanes and economic crises . But cryptocurrency has also become a panacea for economic recovery . In December , Venezuela announced a creation of a new cryptocurrency – dubbed – backed up by Venezuelan reserves of precious metals , oil and diamonds . It hopes to use this cryptocurrency to fight US sanctions , high inflation and low oil prices . However , bitcoin solutions for developing countries – previously known as – shouldn ’ t be seen as the ultimate solution for disaster and crisis management . In the transition period , when the potential of cryptocurrencies and applications of blockchain are unexplored , we have to be sceptical of such initiatives as Sol .
Why bitcoin mining is here to stay February 22 , 2018 8.21am GMT Cambridge Judge Business School Author Lead in Cryptocurrency and Blockchain , Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance , Cambridge Judge Business School Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The enormous use of energy needed to mine bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies is proving to be very contentious , but alternative methods pose far too much of a security risk . The recent that electricity use at bitcoin mining facilities in Iceland may exceed that consumed annually by the country ’ s homes , which could in turn lead to a potential energy shortage , was slightly alarmist in tone . But it showcases the huge amount of computational power needed to mine cryptocurrencies . Is the current cryptocurrency mining process really as wasteful and “ useless ” as , and is it in need of a more efficient and cleaner system ? The current mining process is indeed resource-intensive and wasteful , but there is no magic fix in sight . Many would that it ’ s precisely the “ useless ” nature of cryptocurrency mining that keeps the system secure . Bam ! PoW ! Zap ! Cryptocurrencies are based on a globally distributed ledger shared among all participants in a decentralised network . This ledger is generally organised in the form of a cumbersome data structure – the – which consists of blocks of transactions that are cryptographically linked to each other . Most cryptocurrencies use a particular mechanism , dubbed ( PoW ) , to determine which participant gets the right to add a new block of transactions to the blockchain . To prevent dishonest participants from creating multiple identities to manipulate the public vote , PoW requires participants – called miners – to use special software to solve an extremely difficult cryptographic puzzle . In simple terms , solving the puzzle involves guessing a random number between zero and an infinitely large number . It demands a lot of computational power because , as more machines are used , a miner can quickly try different combinations and increase the odds of solving the puzzle . But cryptocurrency mining comes at a cost in the form of custom hardware and electricity consumption . Bitcoin miners alone produce tens of guesses – known under cryptographic terminology as “ hashes ” – per second . This gargantuan number has risen in tandem with the amount of energy that has been consumed . The main point of contention is that performing these computations doesn ’ t serve any useful or productive purpose outside of cryptocurrency mining itself . But attempts to address the seemingly wasted computing power generated by bitcoin mining have largely fallen flat . Projects over the past few years include , a cryptocurrency launched in 2013 that incentivises miners to find a particular sequence of prime numbers . The same year , was launched to reward people for contributing to scientific research projects by requiring miners to perform scientific computations on , the Berkeley open infrastructure for network computing . was established in early 2014 to incentivise the generation of solar electricity , and the following year students created as part of a computer science project that aims to reward miners for performing actual physical work . But , after initial excitement , all these projects had limited success and are only marginally used today . More recently , the concept of “ virtual mining ” has also emerged to address the high energy consumption of cryptocurrency mining by removing the need for performing computations altogether . This works by tying a miner ’ s vote proportionally to their cryptocurrency holdings – an approach that became known as ( PoS ) . But it ’ s unclear , according to , whether pure PoS systems can achieve the same high security standards as PoW and there have been incidents to accentuate such doubts . In 2014 , it was that stolen cryptocoins could be used to attack PoS-based networks . A hack at an exchange controlling 30 % of the monetary supply of the cryptocurrency VeriCoin , prompted the project ’ s developers to implement an emergency measure – rewriting parts of the transaction history – to prevent the hacker from using the stolen coins to attack the blockchain network . So – for now – PoW remains the best available mechanism to maintain and secure decentralised cryptocurrency systems . Many believe that mining , while energy-sapping , should remain resource-intensive to make it prohibitively expensive for any single entity to gain sustained control over the decentralised system . Given how quickly computing technology develops , perhaps an alternative method will be found . Until then , we appear stuck – for better or worse – with a drain on computational systems and energy resources to power bitcoin and other cryptocurrency networks securely .
Don ’ t be fooled – Venezuela ’ s Petro is not really a cryptocurrency February 23 , 2018 11.03am GMT Warwick Business School , University of Warwick Author Assistant Professor of Finance , Warwick Business School , University of Warwick Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Laughing all the way to the bank . Venezuela is suffering one of the . President Nicolás Maduro ’ s beleaguered government is overseeing scarcities of food and medicine , soaring crime rates and the collapse of public services and the health system . But when it launched a new cryptocurrency , the Petro , in an ( or ICO ) the virtually bankrupt country says it on the first day of the pre-sale . Read more : Any rational investor would probably steer well clear of the 100m Petro made available . The ICO is obviously a way to raise money by getting around against Venezuela , which prevent it from issuing bonds or securities in the regular financial system . It is in desperate need of US dollars , with inflation – which has made the Venezuelan bolívar worthless . Meanwhile , the production of oil , on which the country ’ s economy relies , . An interesting experiment That said , the Petro certainly represents a very interesting experiment . It is the biggest ICO ever proposed and , if it hits its cap of around US $ 5 billion – which is highly debatable – that will represent about 5 % of the total number of Ethereum cryptocurrency and will equal more than a half of the entire by ICOs up to 2017 . For Venezuela this is a smart option . Rather than restructuring the whole economy and linking a new currency to the US dollar , launching a cryptocurrency is much easier in an effort to fund the government and keep it functioning . If anything , because the Petro does not lead to any interference in the domestic political economy by third-party bailing-out institutions such as the IMF . It is fair to assume that the millions of US dollars being spent on the Petro are not coming from the US and Europe , as Venezuela is under strict financial sanctions and so trading in the Petro could land you in trouble . So it is probably coming from Asia and Middle East – and could be anybody from drug dealers to individual retail investors fancying a punt . Having read the ICO it is unclear what the Venezuelan government plans to do with the money . More than half has been earmarked for a sovereign fund – which is yet to be created – and its exact purpose again looks quite blurry . It is also very unclear as to the pricing of the Petro , which the document says will be linked to the price of a barrel of oil ( currently about US $ 60 ) and given a “ discount factor ” , without defining how that is effectively calculated . In that respect , although anchored to the price of oil , the price of the Petro will be virtually controlled by the government . This could certainly be used to its advantage . Not really a cryptocurrency Ironically , Petro ’ s connection to the government goes against the whole idea of cryptocurrencies . They were originally designed to be decentralised and free from any government or central bank control . In this sense the Petro is not really a cryptocurrency – it is a digital security or token , backed by oil reserves . You are not buying anything that can be freely mined and traded on open cryptocurrency exchanges . The mining is controlled by the government and , as explicitly mentioned in the ICO documents , it will decide what exchanges can trade the Petro . It is therefore simply a digital form of debt from a country with no financial credibility and that is badly mismanaging its economy . This is the last resort of a country with practically nowhere else to go . Any credible democracy can raise money in the usual ways through bonds and securities , so I can only see other countries in similar problems doing this . I wouldn ’ t be surprised if countries like Russia are next in line to take advantage of the hype surrounding cryptocurrencies as they are suffering under sanctions as well and have lots of oil . The Petro may be easy to buy in the pre-sale , where typically most , if not all , of the coins are sold in an ICO . Then the ICO carries on for an indefinite period until the Venezuelan government has sold the 100m Petros it is aiming for . That could take many weeks , if not months – and only then will investors be able to trade the Petro . Once trading starts , it ’ s hard to see the price volatility that we have seen in other cryptocurrencies , because the price is essentially controlled by the government . It is not linked to supply and demand . So anyone thinking of buying Petro should think : it might be easy to buy now , but will you be able to trade it after the ICO ? So despite representing a milestone in the growth of the cryptocurrency market , the Petro should be seen as a last-ditch attempt of a defaulting and desperate government to make a quick buck . It ’ s something that should probably raise concerns among anyone thinking of investing in it . If you liked this article , check out our podcast .
CryptoKitties is a blockchain-based game . Why we put money into bizarre cryptocurrencies like ponzicoin and cryptokitties February 28 , 2018 7.16pm GMT The University of Queensland Author The University of Queensland Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Some initial coin offerings seem like scams ( and some are ) , but shows our emotions are part of why people buy in to cryptocurrencies or even if cool-headed rationality screams at us not to . An is just like an initial public offering . But , instead of shares , what ’ s being sold are cryptocurrency “ coins ” or “ tokens ” . These are similar to virtual currencies found in computer games , enabling you to buy goods or services within an ecosystem . of the have already disappeared or failed . This has potentially cost investors . Read more : The boom in initial coin offerings is a textbook example of how our to be and to become on the spectacular gains made by others . Companies and designers can also appeal to our emotions and our conceptions of ourselves by appearing to adopt . This mix of emotions lets “ ” over getting rich quick ( while doing the world a favour ) . Early investors in initial coin offerings , which led to a lot of media coverage of newly minted “ ” . This is a recipe for creating what ’ s called “ ” because people become on the spectacular gains made by others , playing into a lust for wealth . Comparing our meagre incomes to these huge profits also means , deep down , we become terribly afraid of losing our chance at riches , stimulating and what ’ s known as “ loss aversion ” . But even more striking in the boom of initial coin offerings is how many appear to be about some moral initiative , such as supporting , , or . In other words , many initial coin offerings tap into a set of emotional impulses associated with morality . shows that morals are built on powerful emotions , not reasoning . Signals from our environment go through emotional centres of the brain not only , but even before our sensory centres – we “ feel ” even before we “ see ” . Reasoning serves merely to justify emotional reactions . People will justify what they already want to do , or have done , after the fact . We also know from that while reason does give us willpower to resist emotional temptation , it has only a finite capacity to do so and can be overwhelmed . The moral aspect of initial coin offerings also taps into our conceptions of our own identities . shows that if I can find a way that my cryptocurrency ( say a ) would allow you to live out your moral identity ( being a vegan ) then it ’ s much easier for me to get the idea into your mind that you should buy it . Once such ideas are implanted into the mind , they are difficult to restrain . Read more : When we lust for riches , fear being left behind and identify strongly with some moral cause all at once , reason and willpower don ’ t really stand a chance . But simply regulating initial coin offerings is difficult . One of the first things you learn in economics is the “ ” – that regulation seldom does only what it was intended to do . Regulations aimed at protecting individuals from themselves could restrict new technologies and discourage a necessary process – discovering what ’ s a stupid idea and what is a spectacularly good idea . The line between them is very fine indeed and almost never obvious . Among all the crackpots and charlatans we might just discover a technology to educate girls in Africa , fund a breakthrough in clean energy technology , or help to stamp out human rights abuses across the world .
Anthill 23 : Bursting the Bitcoin bubble March 14 , 2018 4.30pm GMT The Conversation Authors Business & Economy Editor and Podcast Producer , The Conversation UK Editor and Co-Host , The Conversation Weekly Podcast Technology Editor Environment + Energy Editor , UK edition Interviewed Professor of FinTech History and Global Trade , Northumbria University , Newcastle Professor of International Finance and Commodities , Trinity College Dublin Professor of Nanophysics , Lund University Senior Lecturer in Financial Law and Regulation , University of East London Deputy Head of the Centre for Digital Finance , Lecturer in Finance , University of Southampton Associate Professor of Physics , University of Leeds Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list In this episode of The Anthill podcast from The Conversation , we ’ re delving into the world of Bitcoin . The cryptocurrency has come a long way since its launch by the mysterious person ( or persons ) in 2008 . The price of one Bitcoin hit a peak of more than . It has since fallen . Bitcoin has made a lot of headlines , but will it be the currency of the future ? To find out , we spoke to professor of business history at Bangor University , Bernardo Batiz-Lazo , about what makes money money . He shared his doubts about Bitcoin – or any other cryptocurrency – going mainstream anytime soon . And Larisa Yarovaya , lecturer in accounting and finance at Anglia Ruskin University , explains some of her recent research into the effect of US policy announcements on different cryptocurrencies . Her findings give some insights into whether or not they make good assets for investment . She also tells us how cryptocurrencies respond in different ways to the US dollar and gold . For many , one of the big appeals of cryptocurrencies is the fact that they are not regulated by any governments . But different countries have responded in wildly different ways to the rise in popularity of Bitcoin . Initial coin offerings have been , where regulators are considering shutting down local cryptocurrency exchanges . Meanwhile , the in China and elsewhere recently triggered a significant slide in Bitcoin ’ s value . Russia , however , has been a hotbed of , where President Vladimir Putin wants to create infrastructure for the national adoption of virtual coins . And in Sweden there ’ s talk of releasing a national cryptocurrency . The Conversation ’ s technology editor Kelly Fiveash spoke to lawyer at the University of East London and , finance expert at Trinity College Dublin , to take a closer look at what different governments are saying – and doing – about regulating cryptocurrencies . Bitcoin has come in for some harsh criticism for the amount of energy it takes to verify every transaction involved – a process that has been dubbed . This involves large amounts of energy-guzzling . Will de Freitas went on a search to find out whether there might be a more sustainable way to make cryptocurrency in the future – by building greener computers . Along the way , he spoke to physicists Oscar Cespedes at the University of Leeds and Heiner Linke at Lund University , about whether the computers of the future might be better for the environment . The Anthill theme music is by . Music in the segment on state reaction to bitcoin is , by Lee Rosevere . And music in the green computing segment is , by Nctrnm . Click here to listen to more episodes of The Anthill , on themes including , , , and . Thank you to City , University of London ’ s Department of Journalism for letting us use their studios to record The Anthill .
Why accountants of the future will need to speak blockchain and cryptocurrency if they want your money March 20 , 2018 3.20pm GMT The Open University Author Lecturer in Accounting and Finance , The Open University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list If you haven ’ t already heard of Bitcoin , you either haven ’ t been paying attention or you ’ re a time traveller who just touched down in 2018 . Because by now , most of us will have heard of Bitcoin and some of us have even jumped on the bandwagon , investing in cryptocurrencies . But despite its popularity , many people still don ’ t understand the technology that underlines it : blockchain . In very simple terms , is an open access shared ledger that keeps a record of all the transactions between parties and allows all users to agree on its contents . New information is added in blocks linked to the previous blocks , resulting in a chain of blocks being built . This ledger is verified by “ ” to make sure it ’ s true – and so creating an audit trail . Past records can be viewed but not altered without the consent of the majority . And it is this technology that is behind cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin – the value of which rose almost in the past year , but has at times , also fallen massively too . Crypto is here to stay It can certainly be anticipated that this evolutionary technology is set to spark a huge revolution in the business world . It ’ s already being trialled at governmental level , from the , to the Big Four accountancy firm such as E & Y – who Bitcoin as payment for its consultancy services . is also considering the use of blockchain technology to replace the current clearing and settlement system of share trading . And even the Bank of England is planning its own Bitcoin-style . Listen to The Conversation ’ s Anthill podcast episode : Major governments around the world have acknowledged and further legitimised the use of Bitcoins as payment vehicles . In fact , more and more major companies are accepting Bitcoins – Microsoft , Virgin Galactic and Subway to name a few . It seems certain then that blockchain technology has a wide appeal . And although it may be a rocky road ahead , with countries such as and banning or restricting the use of cryptocurrencies , crypto is here to stay . Wider implications A recent from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales on blockchain , claims it is fundamentally an accounting technology . In its simplest of definitions , accounting is a process of keeping records , and this is precisely what blockchain offers in a more “ modern ” and “ foolproof ” way . As once the records are agreed upon and validated , the records are bundled into blocks that are virtually impossible to change , making the technology . Essentially , as the business world adopts the use of accounting systems that use blockchain technology , accountants will spend less time doing the mundane tasks of bookkeeping and reconciliations , and will instead focus their energy and time on the interpretation of information and decision making . Blockchain technology will also make it easier for accountants to measure the accuracy of data . Meaning that the technology should effectively cut down on and make accounting errors disappear . The new accountants A by the World Economic Forum suggests that 10 % of global GDP will be stored on blockchain-related technology by 2025 . This implies that the way transactions are recorded and communicated will completely transform between now and then . It it easy to see then , why accountants of the future will need to educate themselves about Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies if they are to account for transactions denominated in it . The profession will evolve and adapt massively over the coming years . And in fact , auditors have already started transactions in the blockchain . Universities around the world have already begun offering . Even the professional accountancy bodies now feature blockchain technology in their qualification syllabus . But of course while all this might sound a bit futuristic to some readers , the evolution of money is something that has been going on for centuries . From a barter system to gold bars , metal coins to paper money , to plastic cards . All we are looking at now , is simply the next cycle in evolution – from electronic money to cryptocurrencies .
Rise of cryptocurrencies could curb American power March 29 , 2018 10.02am BST University of Nottingham University of Auckland Authors Assistant Professor of International Studies , University of Nottingham PhD in International Political Economy , University of Auckland Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . provides funding as a member of The Conversation NZ . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list There has been a lot of talk in foreign policy circles of the coming post-American world – in which the international system will transition from a . But , as we currently stand , the US remains . Much of this perceived power is built on its position at the heart of the international trade and finance system . It ’ s not the rise of another powerful state that could disrupt this . Instead , it is the rise of a new system of finance , trade and technology , in the form of cryptocurrencies that could subvert US power . Yes , China continues to rise , both and , at an incredible rate . And India , although some way off , is . Russia too has experienced a resurgence under Vladimir Putin , reclaiming its position as an important global power , as evident by its . But neither China , India , nor Russia has anywhere near the power the US does right now . Whether it is or , the US has significant advantages over the nearest challengers . In addition to this , the US arguably gains added insulation from decline from being the . Not only is the US home to most of the world ’ s and ongoing , the US dollar remains the unchallenged global reserve currency . Whether the US ’ s dollar hegemony is a blessing or a curse has long been a hotly debated topic . Materially , there are some and some to the US when it comes to its international political power . Arguably , what is more important than the material benefits is that the perception of American power from its privileged international trade and finance position . Even China , which for some has in the current system because it holds large quantities of US dollars , has still been attempting to as a challenge to the US ’ s dollar hegemony . Enter cryptocurrencies The US ’ s perceived financial clout is likely to face significant challenges in the near future . It may come from or the . But pressure could also be generated by the incredible growth of cryptocurrencies , such as Bitcoin . Unlike the attempts of other large powers , such as China , to replace the dollar with an alternative state-based currency , cryptocurrencies offer a promise of a for a global reserve currency . This would undermine the US ’ s current . Plus , because the major cryptocurrencies are not issued or directly controlled by any state , they are seen as more politically neutral than any of the current options . Their non-inflationary – or even deflationary – design might even make them a better store of value than the US dollar . As cryptocurrencies increasingly capture the imagination of people , corporations , and states – a process which is already – the perception that the US has unbreakable financial power will wane . This could help open the floodgates towards the adoption of a cryptocurrency as the global reserve currency . In economic terms , the replacement of the US dollar with some kind of a decentralised digital currency would obviously reduce the influence that the US ’ s financial institutions have on the global political economy . It would also drastically increase its costs of borrowing . This would make the US ’ s currently heavily indebted position untenable , removing any . The flow-on effects of this , from an international power perspective , would be that the US would lose some of its ability to exercise effective economic statecraft – such as sanctions , embargoes and freezing of assets . Also , over time , the US ’ s prestige of being considered the unequivocal global financial leader would diminish . It would therefore lose some of its insulation from the process of broader decline as other powers rise . Unwitting aid Paradoxically , given how it could hinder US power , the US is actually among the fastest adopters of cryptocurrencies to date . Despite some , some US states have made it . Its tech hub , Silicon Valley , is also home to many of the important , making the US something of an unwitting epicentre of the current revolution . Of course , cryptocurrencies without their problems . Many have grown into that are extremely sensitive . Recently , based on fears of a looming ban on adverts by Google , the value of all the world ’ s cryptocurrencies dropped by more than . But , as commodities expert , even if a collapse happens , the usefulness of the technology pioneered by the cryptocurrency boom will remain . Consequently , cryptocurrencies , in some shape or form , are here to stay . And because of this , their potential subversiveness to US power will remain .
The Marshall Islands , Laura Beach . The last thing the Marshall Islands need is a cryptocurrency April 5 , 2018 8.53pm BST The University of Western Australia Author Director of UWA Centre for Software Practice , The University of Western Australia Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages The Micronesian Republic of the Marshall Islands is set to become the first country to base their . The Israeli company Neema will provide the technology and support to launch an ( ICO ) that is expected to raise $ 30 million , half of which Neema will keep . The Marshall Islands ’ parliament passed the law that will create the cryptocurrency , known as the sovereign ( SOV ) earlier this month , giving it full legal status as a currency to be used alongside the US dollar . Unlike bitcoin , all 24 million of the sovereign coins will be issued at once with 6 million being sold to foreign investors and 2.4 million going to Marshallese residents . The money raised will pay for the system in addition to funding anti-global-warming projects and supporting citizens that are still affected by the nuclear bombs the US army tested in the area between . Dodgy or politically motivated ICOs The news of the Marshall Islands ’ ICO comes at a time of growing concern about ICOs being thinly disguised scams . Google that it would be banning all advertising promoting cryptocurrencies and initial coin offerings , a move that follows a similar move in January by . European and US authorities have also of the risks of investing in ICOs . ICOs are in China and South Korea . Perhaps the most contentious of recent ICOs has been that of the Venezuelan government ’ s “ petro ” cryptocurrency that President Nicholas Maduro has raised US $ 5 billion . If true , this would have represented a significant victory for the country in bypassing US sanctions that are currently in place . However , until the currency begins trading on exchanges , it will be impossible to verify if the claims made by the Venezuelan government are true . Right now , the ICO is being used mostly for propaganda In the case of the Marshall Islands , it is absolutely not clear what purpose a digital currency would serve . The country suffers high unemployment and incidences of chronic diseases and most of its national income comes from . Slow speed Internet access is but out of the financial reach of most residents of the islands . Only and 30 % have a mobile phone with the mobile phone network still being It is hard to see what would maintain the value of the sovereign once it is issued , a problem faced by most of the new cryptocurrencies . In addition , even though the sovereign is technically a cryptocurrency , the fact that it is controlled by a central government , that all of the coins are issued at one time , and that it requires all parties to a transaction to be identified , is completely contrary to the original idea of . The use of identification , possibly by facial recognition , is part of a “ Yokwe ” permissioning protocol that has been added to the cryptocurrency to make it . Cryptocurrencies and climate change The biggest irony of the Marshall Islands ’ launching a cryptocurrency is the country faces , yet the technology on which cryptocurrencies are based consumes and thus contributes to large amounts of CO 2 emissions – driving the very sea rise that threatens the Marshall Islands . Bitcoin has been estimated to use 42 TWh of electricity per year , which is more than New Zealand ’ s annual consumption and would be responsible for 20 megatonnes of CO 2 emissions . Bitcoin and Ethereum combined use only slightly less energy every year than . The reason that cryptocurrencies use this amount of energy is all to do with the way transactions are recorded on the blockchain . To prevent fraud and verify that currency has been sent between one party and another , a great deal of intensive computer work is done which uses a large amount of electricity . Even though Ethereum uses than Bitcoin , its use is still significant as is the associated CO 2 emissions that result . The debate in the Marshall Islands ’ parliament about the adoption of the cryptocurrency focussed on the financial costs and benefits of that money to the country . The government even plans to 10 % of the proceeds from the ICO to a Green Climate Fund . Possibly the best scenario for the ICO is for it to succeed and provide the Marshall Islands with much needed funds but for the cryptocurrency itself never to be used so that it doesn ’ t hasten the nations disappearance under the sea . This article was originally published in
Sweden is studying the possibility of an “ e-krona ” , an electronic form of the country ’ s currency . digital currencies : toward a cashless society ? April 10 , 2018 9.02pm BST Pôle Léonard de Vinci – UGEI Author Enseignant-chercheur en Finance quantitative à l ’ ESILV et à l'EMLV , membre du De Vinci Research Center , Pôle Léonard de Vinci – UGEI Disclosure statement Partners and provide funding as members of The Conversation FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages While private digital currencies such as the bitcoin are in the news daily , countries including and are studying the creation a new form of money – a central-bank digital currency ( CBDC ) . The objective is to complement ( or eliminate altogether ) banknotes and coins . But CBDCs risk revolutionising both the way money is created and distributed and the present two-tier financial system of central and commercial banks . Why are central banks considering the introduction of CBDCs ? Cost considerations play a role : banknotes and coins are costly to produce , distribute , handle , and replace . Currently handling costs related to cash are cross-subsidised by commercial banks ’ revenues . Banknotes allow anonymous transactions : a reduced use or elimination of banknotes would help fight illegal activities . For example , in an attempt to combat fraud and corruption back in November 2016 , the Indian government launched a demonetization policy , withdrawing 86 % of its currency overnight . In Sweden , cash payments in the retail sector fell from close to 40 % in 2010 to about 15 % in 2016 . Two-thirds of the country ’ s consumers now say that they can manage without cash , and more than half of all the country ’ s bank branches . Stefan Ingves , governor of Sweden ’ s central Riksbank , , but stated that it ’ s “ reasonable ” for banks to continue handling money . “ A ban on cash goes against the public perception of what money is and what banks do. ” He also noted that for preparedness reasons , “ we need notes and coins that work without electricity. ” The growing popularity of private digital currencies and the distributed-ledger payment technologies they use also have central banks on alert . They can ill afford to be left behind on the currency or the technology . The problem , Ingves recently said , was that all payments could end up being controlled by private-sector banks . Can cash be eliminated ? The elimination of cash is currently not feasible . Not everyone has ( or can have ) a bank account , a credit/debit card , or access to electronic payment systems via a smart phone or computers . People can not be forced to have or use these tools . Access to a debit/credit card might be denied to persons not deemed creditworthy . In addition , an economy entirely based on electronic payments is subject to disruption , including cyberattacks . But there are also important conceptual issues . Banknotes issued by central banks form our base money ; they are our unit of measure of value . The United States and today countries no longer back their currency with a more primitive form of money such as gold ( an exception is Venezuela , which recently launched the “ petro ” , a cryptocurrency backed by the country ’ s oil reserves ) ; today ’ s base money is fiat money whose value is maintained by trust . Nevertheless , the largest share of the monetary mass is not in banknotes but in bank deposits . Banknotes contribute from 5 % to 10 % of the monetary mass depending on the country ; the remaining 90-95 % is formed by bank deposits . Though a bank deposit is simply a number in a computer , it is a debt redeemable on demand in banknotes , with the central banks standing ready to supply the requisite banknotes should a commercial bank not have sufficient cash on hand . Were there no banknotes as base money , deposits would not be the debt of commercial banks with their clients but simply numbers that represent purchasing power . These numbers would appear conventionally as liabilities on the balance sheets of banks whose only obligation would be to transfer , upon request , a given sum to another entity . “ Money , ” that is purchasing power , might thus be in the hands of private-sector banks . Public trust in the generation and distribution of money might be shaken . CBDCs could change the creation and distribution of money Central banks are studying ways to eliminate banknotes while retaining their role as providers of base money . Our current banking system is two-tiered with central banks and commercial banks performing distinctly different roles . Central banks guarantee the safety and integrity of money , ensure that the monetary mass allows for economic growth , and produce the cash required by economic activity . But central banks do not deal directly with non-bank entities ; commercial banks store the public ’ s money in accounts and transfer that money on the demand of the account ’ s holder . In the current two-tier banking system , money is generated in two ways . First , money is created by commercial banks when they simultaneously extend a loan and credit an account of the same sum . Second , following the 2007-08 financial crisis , central banks have been creating money with ( QE ) ; since QE began , the US Federal Reserve Bank has bought over $ 4.2 trillion in assets . Banknotes do not enter directly in this money creation process , but they do provide the accounting underpinnings . Central banks no longer target the total quantity of money directly but target instead interest rates . Presently , individuals and non-bank entities can not obtain banknotes directly from the central bank but must go through commercial banks . Should central banks create CBDCs as base money there is the possibility that they allow non-bank entities or individuals to hold CBDC accounts directly with the central banks . The possibility of doing so comes from technological advances that permit distributed ledgers , a technology that allows safe peer-to-peer transfer of money without going through today ’ s clearing systems . Distributed ledger is used , for example , to confirm transactions in private cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin and Ethereum . The process could go further . Should the central banks allow private non-bank entities or individuals to hold CBDC accounts directly , central banks might extend credit in their digital currency . This could have important consequences for the two-tier banking system . Sergio Focardi is the author of published by Routledge , April 2018 .
This 2013 photo shows Bitcoin tokens at a shop in Utah . What does the future hold for the volatile cryptocurrency ? Bitcoin ’ s wild ride and what ’ s ahead for the cryptocurrency April 16 , 2018 11.37pm BST University of Guelph Author Professor of Economics , University of Guelph Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin has been on a volatile ride in recent times , like a kite caught in variable winds . Its future will likely be as unpredictable as its past given that it ’ s a currency propped up by risk-takers , a target of lawmakers and tied to nothing more substantial than an algorithm . But there are certain variables and concurrent conditions that are signals worth watching when considering Bitcoin ’ s future . An international research team comprised of me , Theodore Panagiotidis at the University of Macedonia in Greece and Orestis Vravosinos at the Barcelona Graduate School of Economics in Spain representing several years in the life of Bitcoin . It was our attempt to reach a deeper understanding of what drives the cryptocurrency ’ s value . Can you really predict how investors will behave around something with so many layers of complexity — around what is essentially a black box system and the subject of so much hype ? It ’ s not an easy task . We set out to bring a measure of predictability to the path the cryptocurrency will take . Online buzz , gold impact Bitcoin We looked closely at 21 variables that could potentially affect Bitcoin returns . Vital market determinants like gold and oil prices , various currency exchange rates and stock market indexes from around the world were part of the mix . Government policy-related economic uncertainty , along with the internet search intensity of Bitcoin , were crucial areas of our research . We took more than 2,500 observations of variables spanning a seven-year period and filtered it through what ’ s known as a LASSO — a “ least absolute shrinkage and selection operator. ” It ’ s an analytical model to determine what the possible predictors , or covariates , might be . We found that of all the many variables , the amount of online chatter about Bitcoin , along with gold returns , and uncertainty over government policy stand out as possible predictors . Having said that , Bitcoin is a moving target that appears not to conform to any logical patterns . In relationship to gold , Bitcoin ’ s value tends to rise as gold rises . But will that remain consistent if the economy stumbles ? In those circumstances , investors seek the safer haven of gold , American dollars and euros , entities they know to have value supported by governments and central banks . The riskier currencies , like the crypto ones , might be abandoned . Mysterious , alluring There are , but Bitcoin has outstripped them all in popularity , mostly because it is cloaked in mystery and because of the media attention surrounding its dramatic value fluxes . There is a fascination with something that is new , that is technologically created and that ’ s hard to hack . The idea of having a Bitcoin network that can evade governments is alluring to people . We found that the general chatter and interest surrounding Bitcoin , positive and negative alike , is a main determinant of its value . We used Google and Wikipedia analytics to measure the hype . Bitcoin as a means of exchange has been running under the radar of regulation over the entirety of its nine-year lifespan . But we can not see that scenario continuing for long . And it seems that investors since Bitcoin ’ s value tends to respond negatively when there is speculation about government action . With Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies , transactions are conducted free of taxation . We can ’ t be sure what the nature of those transactions are , but often cryptocurrencies are used to avoid taxes or duties , or to engage in illicit commerce , which makes them even more shadowy , darkly appealing currencies . Governments will want in on the action It ’ s not clear how governments will ultimately respond to this tax-free commerce , but we can be certain that they ’ ll eventually act . Wherever there are goods and services changing hands and money is being made , If cryptocurrencies continue to grow and position themselves as systems that are beyond the influence of banks and the reach of government regulation , we can be sure that governments will enact national laws and take their share of the proceeds . Many people believe that Bitcoin is going to replace the money we currently use , but we doubt it . That ’ s because big government will never allow it . Governments want the tax revenues , and they want control . Once governments begin to demand access to Bitcoin transaction records , especially those carried out with mainstream businesses , it is likely that regulations will follow . Once that happens , the black box will be opened and Bitcoin ’ s appeal as an underground tax avoidance scheme will be lost . Bitcoin ’ s fate is therefore highly unpredictable and dependent on what governments will do in the future . Once the crytocurrency was taken seriously by gamblers and techies , it became volatile , and that volatility is showing no signs of abating . What our research has shown is that with something as erratic as Bitcoin , with online chatter its main driving force rather than economic fundamentals , it would be best for investors to fasten their seatbelts and hold on tight .
Is someone else making money on your computer ? Cryptojacking spreads across the web May 8 , 2018 11.43am BST Michigan State University Authors Security Researcher , PhD Candidate , Michigan State University Associate Professor , Computer Science & Engineering , Michigan State University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Right now , your computer might be using its memory and processor power – and your electricity – to generate money for someone else , without you ever knowing . It ’ s called “ cryptojacking , ” and it is an offshoot of the like bitcoin . Instead of minting coins or printing paper money , creating new units of cryptocurrencies , which is called “ mining , ” involves performing . These intentionally difficult calculations securely record transactions among people using the cryptocurrency and provide an objective record of the . The user who successfully completes each calculation gets a reward in the form of a tiny amount of that cryptocurrency . That helps offset the main costs of mining , which involve buying and . It is not surprising that enterprising cryptocurrency enthusiasts have found a way to increase their profits , mining currency for themselves by using other people ’ s processing and electrical power . Our at Michigan State University is presently focused on researching ransomware and cryptojacking – the two . Our identified 212 websites involved in cryptojacking . Types of cryptojacking There are two forms of cryptojacking ; one is like other malware attacks and involves to their computer . It ’ s far easier , however , just to lure visitors to a webpage that includes a script their web browser software runs or to . Another variant of this latter approach is to that legitimate websites then unknowingly serve to their visitors . The mining script can be very small – just a few lines of text that download a small program from a web server , activate it on the user ’ s own browser and tell the program where to credit any mined cryptocurrency . The user ’ s computer and electricity do all the work , and the person who wrote the code gets all the proceeds . The computer ’ s owner may never even realize what ’ s going on . Is all cryptocurrency mining bad ? There are legitimate purposes for this sort of embedded cryptocurrency mining – if it is disclosed to users rather than happening secretly . , for example , is asking its visitors to help provide financial support for the site in one of two ways : Either allow the site to display advertising , for which Salon gets paid , or while reading its articles . That ’ s a case when the site is making very clear to users what it ’ s doing , including the effect on their computers ’ performance , so there is not a problem . More recently , a allows people to donate their computer ’ s processing power to mine cryptocurrency . However , many sites do not let users know what is happening , so they are engaging in cryptojacking . Our initial analysis indicates that many sites with cryptojacking software are engaged in : Some of them are as “ malicious websites , ” known to be homes for destructive and malicious software . Other cryptojacking sites were classified as “ pornography ” sites , many of which appeared to be hosting or indexing potentially illegal pornographic content . The problem is so severe that Google recently announced it would from its Chrome browser – regardless of whether the mining was done openly or in secret . The longer a person stays on a cryptojacked website , the more cryptocurrency their computer will mine . The most successful cryptojacking efforts are on streaming media sites , because they have lots of visitors who stay a long time . While legitimate streaming websites such as YouTube and Netflix are safe for users , some sites that host pirated videos are targeting visitors for cryptojacking . Other sites extend a user ’ s apparent visit time by opening a and placing it in a hard-to-spot part of the screen , say , behind the taskbar . So even after a user closes the original window , the site stays connected and continues to mine cryptocurrency . What harm does cryptojacking do ? The amount of electricity a computer uses depends on what it ’ s doing . Mining is very processor-intensive – and that activity . So a laptop ’ s battery will drain faster if it ’ s mining , like when it ’ s displaying a 4K video or handling a 3D rendering . Similarly , a desktop computer will draw more power from the wall , both to power the processor and to run fans to prevent the machine from overheating . And even with proper cooling , the over the long term , damaging hardware and slowing down the computer . This harms not only individuals whose computers are hijacked for cryptocurrency mining , but also . A can consume substantial amounts of electricity and damage large numbers of computers . Protecting against cryptojacking Users may be able to recognize cryptojacking on their own . Because it involves increasing processor activity , the computer ’ s temperature can climb – and the computer ’ s fan may activate or run more quickly in an attempt to cool things down . People who are concerned their computers may have been should run an up-to-date antivirus program . While cryptojacking scripts are not necessarily actual computer viruses , most antivirus software packages also check for other types of malicious software . That usually includes identifying and blocking mining malware and even browser-based mining scripts . may also help users block attacks that try to download cryptojacking software or other malicious programs to their computers . In addition , can reduce the likelihood of being cryptojacked by code embedded in websites . Further , users should either such as Microsoft ’ s or . Cryptocurrency mining can be a legitimate source of revenue – but not when done secretly or by hijacking others ’ computers to do the work and having them pay the resulting financial costs .
What is the real value of a bitcoin ? May 16 , 2018 9.40pm BST ESCP Business School Author PhD Candidate in Finance , ESCP Business School Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoins and benjamins : Which is the real currency ? One of the hot questions regarding the bitcoin since the is its real value . According to Warren Buffett , the most influential investor in the world , the answer to this question would be : . We will try as well to answer to this question using two concepts in economics and finance : minimal ( or residual ) value and Ponzi schemes . The minimal value approach is a prudent approach . Under this approach we would like to know what value remains when everything goes wrong as in cases of market disruption or economic crisis . Value as a currency or value as an investment ? Before we try to value a bitcoin we would need to define it as a currency or as an investment . Its use as a means of payment with can lead us to see the bitcoin as a currency not tied to a country and without central bank . Bitcoins are usually measured in terms of their exchange rate to the Japanese Yen and US dollar as these two currencies remain the main . We will now try to value bitcoins as a currency using the minimal-value approach . All major currencies have a central bank that monitors the exchange rate of their currency respective to other currencies and mostly to the dollar . Contrary to most traded currencies , bitcoin does not have a central bank or an entity monitoring its exchange rate . Therefore , bitcoin exchange rate to the dollar or to the Japanese yen could theoretically go down to zero . As some and would qualify it bitcoin can not be considered as a currency but as an investment . In finance , we would measure an investment ’ s intrinsic value as the sum of future revenues it generates ( with a ) . Bitcoins do not generate any present or future revenues . Therefore , as an investment and using a minimal value approach bitcoins have a zero minimal value . Is the bitcoin the new gold ? Some assets do not generate revenues , the best known unproductive asset being gold . Bitcoin has frequently been compared given that it can not be considered as a currency but like an investment that generates no revenues . Using our minimal-value approach , we can assume that gold has a minimal market value due to its . Indeed , the value as an industrial good of gold would become the minimal value even if it would have no value as a financial investment . Again , bitcoin at this stage does not have any industrial use and could not pretend to such minimal value . That said , to avoid a totally biased view of the bitcoin , we could argue on one potential value for it as an investment – finance methods see a value in diversification . For asset managers with large investment portfolios , one value of bitcoin could therefore come from the fact that bitcoin is not fully correlated to financial markets . Or maybe a Ponzi scheme Then after all we have seen , why do bitcoins have a value on the market ? As Warren Buffet puts it , . This answer corresponds to the definition of a Ponzi scheme . A Ponzi scheme can be defined as a dishonest investment scheme where older investors are paid by new entering investors . For the Ponzi scheme to work you need to have a continuous stream of new investors . In this type of system only one manager works at attracting new investors . In the case of bitcoin , the specificity relies on the fact that all owners become bitcoin managers in most cases without knowing it . Ponzi schemes do not usually give solid grounds for an asset value . Again , assets valued through a Ponzi scheme end up having no value once the Ponzi scheme unravels or collapses . Ponzi schemes usually collapse in times of crisis , . If the bitcoin system proves to be a Ponzi scheme , the next economic downturn may soon unravel it and bring down bitcoin to its minimal value : not much .
Now you see it , now you don ’ t . How can criminals manipulate cryptocurrency markets ? May 31 , 2018 11.44am BST University of North Carolina – Greensboro Author Professor of Management , University of North Carolina – Greensboro Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies like bitcoin are based on systems that are supposed to be from fraud . Yet the U.S. Department of Justice has into manipulation of bitcoin prices . How is that sort of activity even possible ? From researching and for the past three years , I know that blockchain systems have some immutable security features . For instance , if I sent you some amount of bitcoin , and that transaction were recorded in the blockchain ledger , I couldn ’ t force the system to give that money back . The technology itself prevents the transaction from being reversed . But that is only true if transactions happen within the system . And there are other elements of cryptocurrency technologies that actually make fraud easier . Trading bitcoin like stocks Some of the problems the Justice Department is investigating appear to have arisen because bitcoin enthusiasts are not treating cryptocurrencies as a means of payment like dollars . Rather , they ’ re behaving as if bitcoins and their ilk are speculative assets like stocks and bonds . So they ’ re placing orders to buy bitcoin in advance , only later completing the deal . One type of fraud investigators are looking into is called “ , ” in which people place orders but – often without even having to pay a service fee . That makes it look like there ’ s more demand for bitcoin than there actually is , driving up the value of each bitcoin . That sort of manipulation is possible with almost any type of asset . Bitcoin is more susceptible than stocks or bonds because so few people hold large amounts of bitcoin . The hold 40 percent of all the bitcoins in existence – with almost 20 percent held in just 100 accounts . Many of the people who own large amounts of bitcoin have been in the cryptocurrency community for a number of years and know each other . They can take coordinated actions to increase or decrease prices – and because there ’ s no real regulation of cryptocurrency markets , it for them to do so . There are fewer protections for cryptocurrency trading , in part because it ’ s so new . For instance , a high volatility in stock prices would trigger , halting trading and resetting prices to limit investors ’ losses . Cryptocurrency markets have no such built-in mechanisms . Exploiting anonymity Another type of fraud the Justice Department is investigating is called “ , ” in which one person sets up what looks like a legitimate purchase-and-sale deal , but actually does the deal with himself or herself . That makes it look like there is more activity in the market than there actually is , artificially increasing demand and value . Anyone can have as many cryptocurrency accounts as they wish to set up . And many blockchain-based systems keep users ’ identities anonymous . The transactions themselves – if they actually happen – are recorded and publicly viewable , but the accounts involved are only identified with bitcoin addresses , which are long alphanumeric codes like “ . ” That anonymity can make it very hard to prove that wash trading is happening and . At a June 2017 congressional hearing a former federal prosecutor told of cryptocurrency investigations revealing an account set up by a person claiming to be Strengthening oversight Some countries are starting to regulate cryptocurrency markets , either under existing regulations or new ones . In 2015 , for instance , a federal investigation found that the U.S. cryptocurrency company Ripple Labs had not properly followed . In May 2018 , 40 jurisdictions including U.S. states , Canadian provinces and national regulators in both countries launched a formal probe dubbed “ , ” to crack down on fraudulent cryptocurrency trading . They and warned roughly 35 companies about potentially violating securities laws . The vast majority of cryptocurrency trading , however , happens in countries with few regulations and lax enforcement . For instance , from early 2014 to early 2017 , about happened through Chinese cryptocurrency exchanges . At least some of those businesses allegedly to attract new customers . China has since banned online cryptocurrency trading , but . The problems will likely shift to other countries that lack strong rules , which highlights the importance of international cooperation in investigations . Cryptocurrencies are a global phenomenon ; the world ’ s nations – especially those with lots of trading activity – will have to work together to protect consumers .
A bitcoin logo at a facility in Caracas , Venezuela . Bitcoin price manipulation puts trust in cryptocurrencies at risk June 26 , 2018 11.41am BST Tel Aviv University University of Tulsa Authors Professor of Economics , Tel Aviv University Assistant Professor of Computer Science and Tandy Chair of Cyber Security and Information Assurance , University of Tulsa Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies like bitcoin in large part because they can be bought and sold without a government or other third party overseeing everything . But there ’ s a flipside : Unlike in markets for other assets such as stocks or bonds , it makes it much harder to uncover price manipulation and fraud . But that ’ s what the Justice Department likely intends to do . In May , a criminal investigation to examine whether there has been price manipulation in the cryptocurrency markets . While it wasn ’ t clear what time period investigators are looking at , it ’ s likely that they ’ re focusing on the that occurred in late 2017 and early 2018 . The impact of illicit cryptocurrency trading could be large . For example , bitconnect , once the seventh-biggest digital coin , in January , and eroding trust in legitimate cryptocurrencies . have been digital currencies for the last several years . , published in the Journal of Monetary Economics earlier this year , found evidence of in 2013 and 2014 , when prices soared and then tumbled over several months . Could the failure to root out and prevent this kind of abuse erode trust in digital currencies ? Why cryptocurrency fraud matters First it ’ s worth considering why anyone should care about digital currencies . Their total market capitalization of about US $ 350 billion , for example , is just a fraction of the size of the , which is closing in on $ 100 trillion . Still , cryptocurrencies have soared in value in a very short period of time , climbing from just $ 14 billion in January 2014 . And since bitcoin became the first digital currency in 2009 , hundreds have launched , with more than 800 active today . While cryptocurrencies can in theory be used to purchase goods and services – they are called currencies after all – they must first attract large numbers of merchants and consumers , which hasn ’ t happened yet . That ’ s why , currently , crytocurrencies are primarily purchased as financial assets like stocks and bonds that buyers hope will appreciate in value over time . But unlike currencies , financial assets have a tendency to fluctuate wildly . And since investors without a lot of experience with risky assets purchasing cryptocurrencies , that puts them at risk when there ’ s a rapid rise and fall in prices . Bitcoin ’ s first roller-coaster ride That ’ s what happened to the in 2013 , when it jumped from around $ 150 in October to over $ 1,000 in December before dropping over 50 percent weeks later . By early 2014 , several people who traded on Mt . Gox , the leading bitcoin currency exchange at the time , “ suspicious activity ” on the exchange and about it . Our paper , titled “ , ” examined this suspicious trading activity . We were able to conduct the analysis because when Mt . Gox collapsed in early 2014 , its transaction history data got leaked . This gave researchers like us access to approximately 18 million transactions from April 2011 to November 2013 . The key is that these data linked transactions to user accounts – though not their real identities . With this information , we were able to link suspicious trades to accounts . Our analysis of the data confirmed much of what was reported in the “ anonymous ” documents . In the , we go into great detail to show why two trading mechanisms in particular should be considered suspicious . The first , known as the “ Markus bot , ” involved reporting trades that did not exist . The second , or “ Willy bot , ” involved trades in which Mt . Gox itself bought bitcoins from its own customers but did not let many of them withdraw the proceeds from their accounts . In a trial in Japan in 2017 , former Mt . Gox CEO Mark Karpeles that the exchange operated the “ Willy ” accounts and that the trades were issued automatically . The trading activity of these bots led to significantly increased trade at Mt . Gox and other exchanges as well . As a result , prices rose when the bots were active . We believe this is one type of suspicious trading that will likely be investigated by the Justice Department following the massive rise and fall in the price of bitcoin that occurred around the end of 2017 . Investors go for another ride Last year was a banner one for cryptocurrencies , particularly bitcoin , which soared from $ 1,000 at the end of 2016 to a peak of over $ 19,000 in December . The real spike , however , came in November when the in less than a month . The euphoria was over as quickly as it started as bitcoin plunged to $ 7,000 by February . University of Texas finance professors John M. Griffin and Amin Shams released an SSRN working paper in June that price manipulation likely led to more than 50 percent of the meteoric rise in bitcoin in 2017 . Their focus was on the flow of bitcoin going in and out of Bitfinex , which according to an in The New York Times is one of the largest and least regulated exchanges in the industry . Beyond bitcoin , the potential for price manipulation is even higher in digital currencies with much less trading volume . Moving forward Commenting about the market for digital coin offerings – where cryptocurrencies go public – Security and Exchange Commission Commissioner Robert Jackson in April that “ investors are having a hard time telling the difference between investments and fraud. ” The challenge for investigators and others in detecting price manipulation today is that there isn ’ t sufficient transparency about trading patterns of individuals , as there is in more regulated assets like stocks and bonds traded on stock exchanges like the Dow Jones and Nasdaq . In our research , we were fortunate to have internal trading data made public following Mt . Gox ’ s collapse . We do not have the same luxury today . The key lesson is that cryptocurrency markets need increased cooperation between financial regulators and trading platforms . For example , exchanges could be required to share information about the trading behavior of individuals with very large positions . This would help ensure that the trades taking place are in fact legitimate and reflect real sales . The consequence of not taking steps in this direction is likely a loss of faith in cryptocurrencies .
The rise and fall in Bitcoin ’ s value places it among the greatest market bubbles in history . Think carefully before buying Bitcoin – and don ’ t buy the ‘ safe haven ’ claims July 12 , 2018 4.19am BST The University of Western Australia Author Associate Professor , Finance , The University of Western Australia Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The sharp rise and subsequent fall in Bitcoin ’ s value places it among the greatest market bubbles in history . It has outpaced the 17th-century tulip mania , the South Sea bubble of 1720 , and the more recent Japanese asset price and dot-com bubbles . The rapid price rise garnered attention from an increasing number of academics and investment advisers . Some have suggested that Bitcoin improves portfolio performance and can even be used as a potential “ safe haven ” asset in . Our work finds that much of this research is and overlooks some that any investor should consider before allocating funds to such a speculative investment . This is particularly relevant if investing in Bitcoin is rationalised as a prospective in times of market turmoil . Hard to value The first attribute investors consider is how to value Bitcoin . Typically , assets are valued based on the cash flows they produce . Bitcoin lacks this property . This leads to ongoing debate as to the true value of Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies . Some , such as the Winklevoss twins and other , believe the price will soar far higher . Others , including Nobel prize winner and esteemed investor Warren Buffett , believe the real value is closer to zero . Another Nobel winner , , suggests the correct answer is “ ambiguous ” . There is even wide variation in price across the various Bitcoin exchanges . This is common in fragmented markets and makes it difficult for an investor to find the best market price at any point in time – a process called price discovery . High price volatility Bitcoin prices also have a high level of variation ( volatility ) when compared to other possible investments including bonds , stocks and gold . Even tech stocks such as Twitter , which are considered relatively volatile , are found to have less price variation . This adds to the difficulty investors face when trying to value Bitcoin and any portfolios that contain it . This is of particular concern given the large daily losses that Bitcoin has experienced in its relatively short life . The largest one-day decline experienced by the popular S & P500 index since 2011 is 4.2 % . Bitcoin has had nearly 200 days that were worse ( and over 60 days worse than the biggest decline in the gold price of 10.2 % ) . Put another way , Bitcoin has had 200 days worse than the worst day on the stock market . This hardly seems like an enticing investment for most . Low liquidity Investors should also consider the ease with which they are able to buy and sell any assets in which they invest . One method used to measure this liquidity attribute is the bid-ask spread – the difference in the price at which one is able to buy and sell the asset . More liquid assets have a narrow bid-ask spread . Bitcoin ’ s bid-ask spread varies from one exchange to another , but in general it is much larger than for other assets . While bid-ask spreads provide one measure of implicit trading costs , investors also consider the explicit transaction fees they are charged when trading . Transaction fees for trading traditional investments are typically well known and have trended down over time . While Bitcoin fees have recently declined , they have proven to be highly variable , ranging from over $ 30 to under $ 1 . The time taken to process a transaction can also be greater than 78 minutes . This is much longer than for stocks or bonds and creates another layer of uncertainty for investors . Only for the most risk-loving Bitcoin is harder to value , more volatile , less liquid , and costlier to transact than other assets in normal market conditions . Potential investors should be wary and carefully consider whether such highly speculative assets are appropriate additions to any portfolio . Given safe havens are typically in demand during financial crisis , when markets are more volatile and less liquid , it is highly unlikely that Bitcoin is even worth considering as a safe-haven asset .
Bitcoin ’ s rollercoaster ride reflects the biggest issue facing cryptocurrencies : regulation August 17 , 2018 2.24pm BST Trinity College Dublin Dublin City University Authors Professor of International Finance and Commodities , Trinity College Dublin Assistant Professor ( Finance ) , Dublin City University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The rollercoaster of cryptocurrency pricing is on the downward slope again . has fallen by a quarter in the past month , with other large currencies such as and down more than 40 % . So where does this latest bout of losses leave cryptocurrencies ? Sceptics point to the multitude of and avenues for fraud and outright theft . continue to insist that these are the “ future of finance ” . One of the reasons for the latest sell-off is that investors are selling their crypto to pay off the they are required to pay on their gains . It has been estimated that in the US alone . But there is a more fundamental issue at play of investors rushing to convert their profits from ( or ICOs ) into fiat currency like dollars . This is where a new crypto token is created in exchange for existing cryptocurrencies like bitcoin . The lack of regulation to protect the profits made from ICOs reflects the wider issue facing the future of crypto . If cryptocurrencies are to become a more mainstream asset , they will require regulation – but this will be unpopular with much of its existing fan base which is inherently libertarian . ICO trouble The transfer of crypto gains from an ICO to fiat currency can generate quite the scrummage as cryptocurrency investors attempt to exit the market with the largest amount of value possible . In early 2018 , it was that almost 46 % of 2017 ICOs had already failed . The pressure to exit in a timely manner has been exacerbated by the substantial number of ICO scams that have taken place . Crypto analysis site Diar that , since 2017 , nearly US $ 100m had been lost to ICO exit scams where organisers have little or no intention of developing a financial product that will perform to the standard that is advertised to investors . The cryptocurrency world is largely unregulated and so ripe territory for scammers to operate . Fraud in cryptocurrency markets has to date taken multiple forms . As well as ICO issues , there has been fraud at exchange level , the most famous example of which was the which once handled 80 % of global bitcoin trading . The number of issues and vast sums of money involved has resulted in the US Securities and Exchange Commission casting its supervisory gaze on the crypto world . Substantial questions A growing body of academic research has raised substantial questions over the true underlying integrity of cryptocurrency markets . It highlights the various areas where regulation is needed if bitcoin and others are to have a viable future . For example , economist Neil Gandal and colleagues that trading volumes on all Bitcoin exchanges increased substantially on days where they found suspicious trading activity . The authors demonstrated that this suspicious activity by one single actor or agent was most likely a big factor behind the sharp increase in the price of Bitcoin from US $ 150 to US $ 1,000 in late 2013 . Declines in liquidity to contribute to the risk of a crash in Bitcoin . This is problematic given that , even under normal trading conditions , Bitcoin is found to be more volatile , less liquid than other assets . Finance researchers John Griffin and Amin Shams and found that tether , a cryptocurrency pegged to the US dollar , deeply influenced other cryptocurrencies during the sharp price appreciations of 2017 and 2018 . They concluded that tether transactions were responsible for up to 50 % of the increase of Bitcoin and 64 % of the increase in value of other top cryptocurrencies . Our own research has suggested that cryptocurrencies are to other financial or economic assets , and that the majority are by the main market announcements . This all goes to show that cryptocurrencies can be manipulated and do not reflect normal market activity . The underlying economic value of cryptos has also been evaluated , with that a crypto ’ s value is determined solely by the willingness of its holders to hoard . Others have found that crypto values are and not their intrinsic usefulness – again leaving it open to manipulation . point to the economic limits to bitcoin arising from its . Strangely , we now live in a world where joke cryptocurrencies such as the and have tangible value , despite being miniscule in comparison to Bitcoin or Ethereum . The former advertises itself with the statement : “ Seriously , don ’ t buy these tokens ” , the latter contains a warning on its website stating : “ There seems to be a problem with the Fuzzballs chain/source ” and “ mine Fuzzballs at your own risk. ” Would a neutral , independent observer look at these facts and buy these tokens ? What would an observer that survived the think ? To be merited as a somewhat viable and trustworthy financial market product , cryptocurrencies must in some way adhere to a common standard of international regulation . Until this occurs , we will continue to observe situations involving substantial theft from international exchanges , continued disquiet as fraudulent ICOs are uncovered with investor funds channelled around the world , and most interestingly , a market that has become so sensitive to minute details that even the smallest hint of strife can generate substantial price volatility . The challenge for proponents of cryptocurrencies is how to continue to promote their decentralised , anonymous , libertarian nature as their issuance and trading become more and more regulated .
Computer servers mining bitcoin in Italy . Stop worrying about how much energy bitcoin uses August 20 , 2018 11.31am BST University of Pittsburgh Author Research Associate in Electrical and Computer Engineering , University of Pittsburgh Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The word “ bitcoin ” is as likely to garner feverish excitement as it is glaring criticism . The financial community sees speculative promise in the form of trade that currently has little to no regulation . Meanwhile , others argue that it ’ s a distraction that detracts from the overall longevity of U.S. financial institutions . Bitcoin ’ s energy consumption has become a recent talking point in the debate . published May 30 indicates that bitcoin dramatically increases global energy consumption – and that electricity is its “ Achilles heel. ” clean energy technology , specifically the transition toward decarbonized energy systems . I think that the conversation around bitcoin and energy has been oversimplified . New technologies – such as data centers , computers and before them trains , planes and automobiles – are often energy-intensive . Over time , all of these have become more efficient , a natural progression of any technology : Saving energy equates to saving costs . By talking specifically about just the consumption of energy alone , I believe many fail to understand one of the most basic benefits of renewable energy systems . Electricity production can increase while still maintaining a minimal impact on the environment . Rather than focusing on how much energy bitcoin uses , the discussion should center around who indeed is producing it – and where their power comes from . Counting consumption Unlocking a bitcoin requires an intense amount of computational power . Think of bitcoin as sort of a hidden currency code , where its value is derived by solving a programmable puzzle . Getting through this puzzle requires computer brainpower . Electricity is 90 percent of the cost to mine bitcoin . As such , bitcoin mining uses an exorbitant amount of power : somewhere between in 2017 alone . That ’ s as much electricity as it takes to power the entire nation of Ireland in one year . Indeed , this is a lot , but not exorbitant . Banking consumes of power annually . If bitcoin technology were to mature by more than 100 times its current market size , it would still equal only 2 percent of all energy consumption . Power sources Bitcoin is certainly consuming an increasing amount of power worldwide , but is it increasing the world ’ s carbon consumption ? Bitcoin miners have traditionally , where coal supplies . Now , bitcoin mining is exploding in areas with cheap power , . Power there is mainly cheap due to the , a low-carbon resource . Bitcoin mining in China , with a largely fossil-based electricity source , may indeed be problematic . China is already one of the world ’ s . However , bitcoin mining in Oregon ? Not the same thing . Not all types of energy generation are equal in their impact on the environment , nor does the world uniformly rely on the same types of generation across states and markets . In Europe , for example , Iceland is becoming a . That nation . An abundant supply of geothermal and hydropower energy makes bitcoiners ’ power demand cheap and nearly irrelevant . Similarly , in the hydropower-driven Pacific Northwest , miners can still expect to turn a profit without . The right discussion Like many other aspects of the energy industry , bitcoin is not necessarily a “ bad guy. ” It ’ s simply a new , and vaguely understood , industry . The discussion about energy consumption and bitcoin is , I believe , unfair without discussing the energy intensity of new technologies overall , specifically in data centers . Rather than discussing the energy consumption of bitcoin generally , people should be discussing the carbon production of bitcoin , and understanding whether certain mining towns are adding to an already large environmental burden . Although there has been extensive discussion in the media of bitcoin ’ s energy consumption , I ’ m not aware of any studies that actually calculate the comparative carbon footprint of the bitcoin process . Global electricity consumption is going up overall . The U.S. Energy Information Administration nearly 28 percent over the next two decades . But increasing energy consumption is bad only if we aren ’ t shifting toward less carbon-dense power production . So far , it seems that only miners are currently shifting toward cleaner parts of the world . So perhaps people should quit criticizing bitcoin for its energy intensity and start criticizing states and nations for still providing new industries with dirty power supplies instead .
A history of Bitcoin – told through the five different groups who bought it August 28 , 2018 1.59pm BST Loughborough University Author Reader in Sociology , Loughborough University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The recent in Bitcoin ’ s value are just the latest in a series of spectacular peaks and troughs since it was created in 2009 . ( Though its price has been falling recently , it remains five times higher than last April , before the latest major peak began . ) Commentators are often of Bitcoin buyers , writing them off as naive victims of a fraudulent bubble . But if we look more carefully , we can trace the history of Bitcoin through five key narratives . Each has drawn in a different group of buyers and in doing so contributed to its long-term growth in value . The idealists Bitcoin arose from a tiny group of cryptographers who were trying to solve the facing digital money : “ cash ” held as a digital file could easily be copied and then used multiple times . The problem is easily solved by financial institutions , who use a secure central ledger to record how much everyone has in their accounts , but the cryptographers wanted a solution that was more akin to physical cash : private , untraceable , and independent of third parties like the banks . Satoshi Nakamoto ’ s solution was the Bitcoin blockchain , a cryptographically secured public ledger that records transactions anonymously and is kept as multiple copies on many different users ’ computers . The first narrative of Bitcoin ’ s value was built into Nakamoto ’ s original “ ” . This claimed that Bitcoin would be superior to existing forms of electronic money such as credit cards , providing benefits like eliminating chargebacks to merchants and reducing transaction fees . The libertarians But from an early stage , Nakamoto also marketed Bitcoin to a libertarian audience . He did so by stressing the absence of any central authority and particularly Bitcoin ’ s independence from both states and existing financial institutions . Nakamoto criticised central banks for debasing money by issuing increasing amounts of it and designed Bitcoin to have a hard limit on the amount that could be issued . And he stressed the anonymity of Bitcoin transactions : safe , more or less , from the prying eyes of the state . Libertarians became enthusiastic advocates and buyers of Bitcoin , more as an act of rebellion than for financial reasons . They have remained highly influential in the Bitcoin community . The savvy young These , however , were small constituencies , and Bitcoin really started to take off in July 2010 when on Slashdot.org ( “ news for nerds ” ) spread the word to many young and technically savvy buyers . This community was influenced by the “ Californian ideology ” – belief in the capacity of technology and entrepreneurs to transform the world . Many bought small quantities at a low price and were somewhat bemused to find themselves sitting on significant investments when the price multiplied . They became used to huge fluctuations in the price and frequently advocated “ hodling ” Bitcoin ( a mis-spelling of “ hold ” , first used in a now posted by an inebriated user determined to resist constant “ sell ” messages from day traders ) . The hodlers insisted , half seriously , that Bitcoin was going “ to the moon ! ” ( used 178,000 times on the bitcointalk forums ) , and talked of buying “ lambos ” ( lamborghinis ) with their gains . This countercultural levity generated a sense of community and a commitment to holding Bitcoin that helps to sustain its value . The investors The last two groups that have contributed to Bitcoin ’ s history are more conventional . What I consider the fourth group of investors consists of speculators who have been attracted by the volatility and peaks in Bitcoin prices . On the one hand , we have the day traders , who hope to exploit the volatility of Bitcoin ’ s price by buying and selling quickly to take advantage of short-term price movements . Like speculators in any other asset , they have no real interest in the larger picture or of questions of inherent value , but only in the price today . Their only narratives are “ buy ” and “ sell ” , often employed in an attempt to influence the market . On the other hand , we have those who are drawn in by news of price bubbles . Ironically , bubble narratives in the press , often designed to deter investors , can have the opposite effect . These investors join what Keynes called a “ beauty contest ” – they only care what other people might be prepared to pay for a Bitcoin in the short to medium term future . The portfolio balancers The final and newest group of Bitcoin buyers are the portfolio balancers : more sophisticated investors who buy Bitcoin to hedge against wider risks in the financial system . According to modern portfolio theory , investors can reduce the riskiness of their portfolios overall by buying some Bitcoin because its peaks and troughs don ’ t line up with those of other assets , providing some insurance against stock market crashes . This is an emerging group , but one that could significantly raise Bitcoin ’ s acceptability among mainstream investors . Bitcoin ’ s value , then , has been built on an evolving series of narratives which have drawn in successive waves of buyers . While mainstream commentators are often dismissive of Bitcoin as lacking inherent value , all asset market values depend on narrative processes like these . Bitcoin may well collapse again , but so may any other financial asset . Investing in Bitcoin is neither more nor less risky than investing in the latest technology company launched on the stock market without ever having made a profit .
Cryptocurrencies even have their own investment companies . Cryptocurrencies , blockchains and their dark side : 4 essential reads September 28 , 2018 11.35am BST The Conversation Authors Senior Editor , Economy + Business Politics + Society Editor , The Conversation US Editorial Researcher , The Conversation Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Crytocurrencies , after a wild ride , may be at a tipping point . Bitcoin and other digital currencies exploded in 2017 only to spend much of 2018 losing a large chunk of those gains . A unit of , the most popular cryptocurrency , climbed from under US $ 900 at the end of 2016 to a high of almost $ 20,000 in December 2017 and has since plunged to a little over $ 6,000 . The intense volatility and potential for hefty profits are catching the gaze of both and , either of which could jeopardize the future of cryptocurrencies . Here are four stories from that will help readers better understand cryptocurrencies and their dark underbellies . What is money in age of bitcoin ? Before we talk about digital money , we should define what money is in the first place . The answer is actually , according to University at Buffalo professor and philosopher David Koepsell . Money has changed so much recently that it has morphed into “ forms that are barely understandable. ” And so , Koepsell asks , as the blocks of zeros and ones that represent digital currencies replace the colorful pieces of paper and coins , does money still exist and if so what is its value ? “ Without government insurance or contractual guarantees , only mutual trust maintains the value and integrity of the system , ” he writes . “ What bitcoin owners own is the debt , just as those who own money in banks own debts that are recorded in bits . They do not own the bits that comprise the information representing that debt , nor the information itself , they own the social object – the money – that those bits represent. ” The value of blockchain What makes bitcoin and other digital currencies work is the underlying transaction system known as a blockchain . Essentially , it uses a decentralized database to track and store information in a potentially reliable and secure way . Beyond safeguarding money , however , blockchains may solve a “ stunning array of problems , such as stabilization of financial systems , identification of stateless persons , establishing title to real estate and media , and efficiently managing supply chains , ” Ari Juels and Ittay Eyal , computer science researchers at Cornell . Technical challenges of blockchains remain , but bitcoins are proof that they can work , they write . Enabling criminals One of the pitfalls of cryptocurrencies is that a key strength – that they provide anonymity to users – is also a significant weakness . That ’ s because their privacy fuels crime by enabling criminals to evade identification by law enforcement , . They believe the problem is only going to get worse as cryptocurrencies become even stronger , with no easy solution in sight . “ Crime-fighting tools require empowerment of authorities , ” the authors argue . “ Cryptocurrencies are innately anti-authority technologies . How this tension is resolved will determine the future of the world ’ s monetary systems. ” Manipulating bitcoin A problem that has long plagued financial assets is fraud and price manipulation , such as when traders work together to try to fix the price of a financial instrument . Digital currencies were thought to be more immune to that type of behavior . by Tel Aviv University ’ s Neil Gandal and University of Tulsa ’ s Tyler Moore suggests price manipulation in bitcoin and its peers is happening on a very large scale , which helps explain the sharp rises and falls in their prices in recent years . The Justice Department recently opened an investigation into whether there has been price manipulation in digital currency markets . “ The challenge for investigators and others in detecting price manipulation today is that there isn ’ t sufficient transparency about trading patterns of individuals , as there is in more regulated assets like stocks and bonds traded on stock exchanges like the Dow Jones and Nasdaq , ” Gandal and Moore write . “ The key lesson is that cryptocurrency markets need increased cooperation between financial regulators and trading platforms. ” “ The consequence of not taking steps in this direction is likely a loss of faith in cryptocurrencies , ” they conclude .
The value of bitcoin gifts is subject to swift changes . Charities take digital money now – and the risks that go with it October 3 , 2018 11.32am BST University of Pittsburgh The Ohio State University Authors Associate Professor of Law , University of Pittsburgh Fisher Designated Professor of Accounting and Chair , Department of Accounting & Management Information Systems ( MIS ) , The Ohio State University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . provides funding as a member of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Many large charities , despite being that benefit the public , are accepting bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies – volatile forms of digital money – as donations . Take , for example , the , one of the country ’ s largest charities . It – nearly $ 4.5 billion – in digital assets according to its annual financial statement . As and charities face , we have spent considerable time examining what got nonprofits dabbling in digital currencies in the first place and what could go wrong as a result . Volatile juncture While the Silicon Valley Community Foundation probably holds more cryptocurrency than any other charity , it is not unique . , the , said digital money was its in 2017. are also accepting donations in bitcoin , as are new charities . The giving of , just as the market for these newfangled assets boomed . Bitcoin , the most common cryptocurrency , against the U.S. dollar in 2017 . XRP , the of digital money , gained over the course of the year . These gains gave way to massive losses in the first eight months of 2018 , when digital currencies plunged more sharply than . Some charities that received massive cryptocurrency donations in 2017 may not have been able to convert them into regular money before they lost much of their value the next year . Silicon Valley Community Foundation , for example , disclosed in its that for more than 45 percent of its investment assets , restrictions would prevent them from being converted to cash at any point in 2018 . The fact that charities only once a year means that the scale of their at-risk wealth , as of now , is unknown . Appreciated assets Why would charities accept digital money in the first place ? The answer has to do with changes in philanthropy in recent years . An of charitable giving is coming from a small group of extremely wealthy donors as the percentage of Americans who donate to nonprofits declines . And mega-donors don ’ t always give charities money . Instead , they pass along assets , such as stocks , bonds and bitcoin . That approach to giving benefits them in two ways . To see why , it helps to understand how these transactions work . Say a wealthy couple gives stock in a company that they bought at $ 1 per share . This was such a good investment that those shares are now worth $ 1,000 each . Upon donating , the couple gets a $ 1,000 deduction on that year ’ s tax return with another bonus : never having to pay taxes on the $ 999 gain in the value of that donated stock as income . That $ 1,000 can then offset the income tax on $ 1,000 of wages . Had the couple sold the stock and donated the same $ 1,000 , however , the donation would merely offset the gain from the sale of the stock . This opportunity means that many wealthy Americans benefit from donating assets that have become more valuable over time rather than by simply giving money . Consider how the top executives of Facebook have supported causes . As a company that , the wealth accrued to Facebook ’ s biggest shareholders is held in the form of stock that has gained value over time . It should be no shock , then , that the company ’ s leaders like CEO and Chief Operating Officer have sought to donate some of their Facebook stock to charity rather than giving cash . Zuckerberg and his wife Priscilla Chan have given Facebook stock worth to a , essentially a charitable savings account that on a large scale operates like a foundation without having to follow the rules that foundations must observe , at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation since 2010 . The couple gave another of their Facebook shares to a foundation associated with their Chan Zuckerberg Initiative in 2017 . For her part , in Facebook stock in both 2016 and 2017 . Facebook ’ s major shareholders are by no means the only ones using this strategy . , and executives have also moved massive amounts of their stock into charitable accounts . The urge to donate , especially once the meteoric rise in the value of bitcoin and similar assets created the opportunity for investors to reap huge potential charitable tax breaks , was only natural . Charitable middlemen The nonprofits that get these donations , meanwhile , need money they can spend on salaries , rent and other expenses . And some financial assets are hard for charities to accept and turn into regular money . Your local food bank , for instance , may not know what do with a stake in a private equity fund or if your rich neighbor gave it a donation in one of those ways rather than writing a check or using their credit card . That has led to the rise of a new kind of middleman with specialized expertise . got 61 percent of its donations in assets other than cash in 2017 . Other prominent donor-advised fund sponsors saw a similar result . obtained of its 2017 donations in non-cash assets . In the last month of the year , that figure was 80 percent for . These fast-growing charities bring a key skill : harvesting capital gains . That is , they accept tax-advantaged donations , hold onto that wealth , and – in most cases – derived from those assets to the donor ’ s charities of choice when the donor asks . its ability to accept privately held business interests and other assets that are not publicly traded . its ability to convert such things as stakes in private companies , fine art and bitcoin . The Silicon Valley Community Foundation is emblematic of this phenomenon taking hold in more traditional charitable organizations . It has as a repository for complex assets like stock held in companies before they go public and digital currencies . The consequences To be sure , there is nothing improper about these practices . Giving investment assets gradually became commonplace after the tax code established the favorable treatment of donations to charitable organizations . The growth in giving digital money can be traced to the IRS ruling in 2014 that the government sees it as a form of . However , many of these assets are extremely volatile . As the demonstrated , digital money ’ s value is subject to big changes . This can be a problem when donors give away assets right before their value crashes – or a boon when those gifts precede a sharp rise . Either way , wealthy donors get tax deductions . And when gifts precede crashes , it can take more tax revenue out of government coffers than charities get in theirs .
Bitcoin turns ten – here ’ s how it all started and what the future might hold October 30 , 2018 3.52pm GMT University of Exeter Author Senior Lecturer in Economics , University of Exeter Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list A mysterious , anonymous entity known as “ Satoshi Nakamoto ” posted a on October 31 2008 entitled “ Bitcoin : A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System ” . It was the first time that the concept of Bitcoin entered the world . But outside of the mailing lists – those promoting the use of privacy-enhancing technology – this event was hardly noticed . Ten years on , who hasn ’ t at least heard of the cryptocurrency ? On just nine pages , the white paper explained how the Bitcoin system would work . Many attempts at electronic cash had already been made going right back to computer scientist David Chaum ’ s developed in the 1980s . Using an intricate dance of cryptography , Digicash enabled people to pay each other online anonymously , yet prevented users from sending the same money to two different people at the same time ( the so-called ) . Read more : For a while , Digicash caught on . Even the likes of , and a growing list of merchants started accepting it . Compared to the credit-based systems of Visa , Mastercard and later Paypal , at least some people could see the benefits of a currency that allowed micropayments with extremely low transactions fees . Anyone with libertarian tendencies loved the idea of using a currency outside the control of any authority . But Visa and Mastercard upped their game and won the battle for payment dominance . It seemed the struggle was over , but some cypherpunks refused to give up . Adam Back , which together with ( both cited in Nakamoto ’ s white paper ) and were the last significant efforts to create an online cash system before Bitcoin . The idea fizzled out following the dotcom bust of 2000-02 . It was only brought back to life by Nakamoto in 2008 . Nakamoto ’ s vision Previous attempts came close to creating secure digital cash , but there was always one major problem they encountered : the need for a trusted third party like a bank to maintain the system in some way . Nakamoto ’ s white paper solved this problem by distributing the process of maintaining a totally transparent public ledger ( known as the blockchain ) among a network of competing “ miners ” . As long as one miner does not control more than half of the whole network of computing power , the system is secure . Cryptography , computer science , and now crucially an elaborate system of economic incentives all came together into a mindblowing overall piece of ingenuity . The cypherpunk vision to enhance privacy , limit government power and increase its transparency had finally been realised . Or had it ? If there was any lesson to be learned from the failure of Digicash , it was that you could invent a brilliant system , but you had to convince people to use it , despite them never being able to come close to understanding how it actually works . With Bitcoin , we have seen extraordinary hype , with , and thousands of spin-off cryptocurrencies and private blockchains that are all just variations of the original . Read more : Ethereum is arguably one of the most significant spin offs . It shows how blockchain technology can be combined with , potentially providing a costless , decentralised way of replacing the colossal global army of trust-based service industries that conventional money relies on . There is , however , only one existing blockchain that is consistent with Nakamoto ’ s vision : , a so-called “ hard-fork ” of Bitcoin that generally shares the same history and protocol , except for two crucial details . The blocks on its chain are a massive 32-times larger than the original Bitcoin , and growing . More transactions per block , means lower fees per transaction , paving the way for global adoption . Plus , built-in codes that were switched off in the original Bitcoin , have been reignited , potentially allowing all the smart contract capabilities of Ethereum . Vision accomplished ? The white paper itself is not explicit about goals , but the main implicit aim is clear : to create a secure form of online cash that does not depend on a trusted third party . This has already been demonstrated as a concept . The only question that remains is , to what extent will it be adopted ? A recent clue to that question may lie right in the heart of London ’ s financial centre , Canary Wharf . Here , the Brewdog company accepting Bitcoin Cash as payment . It is cheaper for them to process payments compared to credit cards , even allowing for the cost of them having to convert Bitcoin Cash back to pounds sterling . Recently , computer companies and Microsoft have also started accepting Bitcoin Cash as payment . Further afield , more and more developing countries like South Africa are experimenting enthusiastically with new apps that store Bitcoin Cash like , which may help people who can ’ t open bank accounts . A new app developed in Spain called and an even bolder concept called hint at a whole new paradigm of automatic click-based micropayments that could also spell the end of pop-up adds appearing on popular content online . Nakamoto ’ s vision , in some sense , may have already been achieved , but will Bitcoin Cash permanently replace all fiat currencies and become ? The world wide web arrived in 1990 , and you could argue it took a dramatic collapse and 20 years before its true commercial potential could be realised . In 2028 , maybe it ’ s not unfeasible that the technology underlying Bitcoin will do the same for global money and all trust-based financial , legal and other services . More articles , written by academic experts : For more evidence-based articles by academics , subscribe to our .
Initiative Q is not the new Bitcoin , but here ’ s why the idea has value November 5 , 2018 6.47pm GMT The University of Queensland Author Researcher , The University of Queensland Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Could free units of a new digital currency end up being worth thousands of dollars ? , which is aggressively marketing itself on social media , wants you to think so . It urges you to sign up now , and get your friends to do so as well , to maximise the value of your free “ Q ” currency . This has invited comparisons to pyramid schemes and suspicions about its . It ’ s not a scam . It also won ’ t make you fabulously wealthy . It is , nonetheless , an interesting idea . I want to use – the study of the basic rules governing emerging economic systems such as cryptocurrencies – to show you how Initiative Q is an interesting experiment , criticisms of its marketing methods aside . If you sign up , you might help the world discover a remarkable new payments system . Cryptocurrency basics Initiative Q ’ s marketing explicitly draws comparisons with the best-known cryptocurrency : “ Think of it as Bitcoin seven years ago. ” The implication is this is the next Big Thing in internet money . Yet Initiative Q also states . The basic definition of a is simply any form of digital money consisting of entries in a cryptographically secure virtual ledger , rather than physical coins and notes . In this sense “ Q ” can be thought of as a cryptocurrency . However , cryptocurrency is increasingly defined further as to manage and secure the virtual ledger that records transactions . Bitcoin , for instance , uses blockchain technology to the virtual ledger across a network and the process of coming to agreement on how to update it . Blockchain protects a cryptocurrency from manipulation by hackers or governments , but it comes with costs . Read more : What makes Q different Initiative Q is not like Bitcoin in most technical respects . It will not use blockchain but control the “ true ” ledger centrally . This makes blockchain enthusiasts , because it cuts against the aversion to any one group holding power over a system . But it will avoid some costs of Bitcoin and similar cryptocurrencies . One is the feared of energy-intensive “ proof of work ” algorithms that prove to the whole network a blockchain is compiled correctly . “ Q ” will avoid that by the company deciding what is the “ true ” ledger . That also allows the company to counter fraud and resolve disputes by “ reversing ” transactions , where blockchains can typically only do this with an intensely difficult “ ” . By design the Q won ’ t fluctuate wildly in value , either . The goal is a stable private currency for payments processing rather than a vehicle for speculation . It is clearly designed with the current “ ” trend in mind . Read more : , who helped design “ Q ” , is known for advocating systems where money does not fluctuate wildly in value . He has clearly built Initiative Q around , which says the money supply should be controlled to keep prices stable . So the value of “ Q ” will not fluctuate wildly . All of this makes Initiative Q unlike Bitcoin , although it creates a private digital currency . Experiments in institutional technologies My colleagues at call cryptocurrencies “ ” . Anyone who wants to use the system has to act within the institutions it creates - that is , obey its fundamental rules . These systems can be privatised . Any private citizen with a laptop can write a protocol that administers large-scale institutional systems like money , which historically only the centralised state could enforce . Read more : For example , Bitcoin ’ s creator , , is said to have belted out the source code for the cryptocurrency on a laptop at home during spare time . Now millions of people around the world use the system to interact every day . What ’ s exciting is that this allows people to invent all sorts of different institutional systems to see which ones work best – feeding a process my colleagues have called “ ” . From this perspective , what is interesting about is that it creates a oriented around streamlined payments processing . It is supposed to take all the good things about PayPal and improve on them . Not the new Bitcoin , but still interesting One can understand why Initiative Q ’ s marketing strategy has caused it to be dismissed as a . But like any payments system , it faces “ ” . It needs lots of people to use it . The more people do , the more value it has . If it does succeed , though , it won ’ t make you fabulously wealthy . You ’ ll get something more like a gift card . The value of “ Q ” is designed to be stable , so you shouldn ’ t be expecting to become a crypto-billionaire . If you do sign up , you might at least enrich the field of institutional cryptoeconomics . Experiments like this are how we improve our institutions , through a process much like scientific discovery .
Bitcoin ’ s high energy consumption is a concern – but it may be a price worth paying November 7 , 2018 12.30pm GMT University of Sussex Author PhD Researcher in Blockchain Technologies , University of Sussex Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin recently turned . In that time , it has proved revolutionary because it ignores the need for modern money ’ s institutions to verify payments . Instead , Bitcoin relies on cryptographic techniques to prove identity and authenticity . However , the price to pay for all of this innovation is a high carbon footprint , created by . Fundamental to that mining process is a peer-to-peer network of computers , referred to as validators , who perform . In essence , this involves computers solving computationally-intensive cryptographic puzzles that prove blocks of transactions , which are recorded in a public asset ledger , known as a blockchain . This ledger is publicly viewable by all computers , which helps the system achieve consensus in an unreliable network of participants . Validators are called miners because the computer , or node , that successfully validates one of those blocks is rewarded with “ mined ” Bitcoin . Thus mining is also the process by which Bitcoin adds new coins to the network . But these processes consume a vast amount of power . In my 2016 article , , I estimated Bitcoin mining ’ s annual energy use at 3.38 TeraWatt hours ( TWh ) , which I equated to the total 2014 annual consumption of Jamaica . show the currency ’ s annual consumption rising exponentially , currently reaching an incredible 55TWh . Indeed , a new paper in suggests that the energy costs of mining cryptocurrencies exceed the costs of mining physical metals . Furthermore , the paper estimates that Bitcoin emitted between 3m and 13m metric tonnes CO₂ in the first half of 2018. even suppose that , if Bitcoin ’ s adoption continues to rise , within a couple of decades , such emissions could help push global warming above 2°C . However , both the study in Nature and the team in Hawaii make assumptions about the means of energy generation . In the light of the recent disturbing , humanity would be wise to act on the recommendation for an “ unprecedented shift in energy systems ” . The hope is that such a shift towards large-scale renewable energy does occur , thus invalidating the assumptions made in those papers . Nevertheless , concerns over Bitcoin ’ s energy consumption remain , so , another cryptocurrency , is investigating a more energy efficient consensus algorithm known as . This method differs from Proof of Work because miners on this network use their economic stake to prove transactions and therefore , they are not performing energy intensive calculations . That introduces some complications – not least , how to ensure that people in this network act honestly , as they would have nothing to lose by behaving dishonestly ? Ethereum ’ s proposed solution is to introduce penalties through measures such as penalising miners for simultaneously producing blocks on two versions of the blockchain . After all , only one of those blockchains is valid . Bitcoin ’ s Proof of Work overcomes such problems implicitly because it includes natural penalties since miners have to expend energy to prove transactions . In economic game theory , a is said to be reached when a system stabilises because no one gains by changing strategy from that which produces the stable state . Since Bitcoin rewards are given to miners only if their blocks help form the valid Bitcoin blockchain , the most profitable outcome , or the Nash Equilibrium , is for each miner to act in consensus with the majority . As a result , Bitcoin ’ s Proof of Work algorithm has proven effective , despite the excessive energy consumption . A price worth paying ? In essence , my work looks at whether blockchains are a rebuttal to the hierarchies of capitalism . If Bitcoin promotes a way of organising that , might that indirectly drive down society ’ s energy use and help lessen its environmental impact ? After all , consider the recent , which all but for the dramatic decline in wildlife populations . We need alternatives . Perhaps , then , Bitcoin ’ s revolutionary offer , as an alternative to capitalism , means its energy use is a price worth paying ? That argument holds some weight if it drives down consumption in other areas of society because Bitcoin mining is not the primary driver behind climate change . However , even then , given the urgency of environmental degradation , if we continue to produce energy in a manner that creates so much warming CO₂ , that argument may provide scant consolation . Perhaps alternative consensus schemes , such as Ethereum ’ s Proof of Stake , provide part of the solution . However , Bitcoin or not , if humankind is to avoid climate catastrophe , we need to take urgent action and find solutions that produce clean , sustainable energy . If we do that , humanity will benefit , and as a by-product , so will Bitcoin .
shutterstoc . You may not actually own your Bitcoin – legal expert November 23 , 2018 1.06pm GMT Queen Mary University of London Author Research associate , Queen Mary University of London Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The price of Bitcoin has dropped by , so anyone who invested heavily at the peak will have lost a lot of money . And now there ’ s more bad news for crypto-currency investors to worry about : they may not legally own the digital assets they have purchased . My colleagues and I have recently showing that courts in England and Wales are unlikely to identify digital tokens as property , since the law does not recognise possession of intangible items . This means that crypto-currency holdings may not qualify as property at all . As a result , although digital tokens are technically secured through blockchain technology , the level of legal protection is unclear . And the same likely applies in other common law jurisdictions such as the United States , Hong Kong , Singapore , and most of India . Defining property Property law deals with the rights you have over the things you own . systems distinguish between land , called “ real property ” , and all other property , called “ personal property ” . Personal property includes rights over two categories of things . First , there are “ ” . These are tangible items which you can physically possess and transfer to another . The £20 note in your pocket is a thing in possession . Second , there are “ ” , a mixed category of rights that can only be claimed or enforced by legal action . This includes debts , rights under contract , and intellectual property . The £20 you have deposited at a bank is a thing in action , because the bank owes you a debt of £20 . That debt is intangible , but , if necessary , could be enforced through legal action . So what about digital tokens such as crypto-currencies ? Tokens don ’ t physically exist . They are . And in England and Wales has established that a thing which exists only in electronic form can not be the subject of possession . So digital tokens aren ’ t things in possession . But they don ’ t really resemble . A Bitcoin doesn ’ t give you a right to anything or against anyone . What you have is a ( a sort of secret number password ) that gives you exclusive control over that Bitcoin . This allows you to submit transactions to the ledger and send your Bitcoin to anyone you like . Other types of tokens do give you a right against the token issuer . For instance , give you a right to a product or service from a company . Such tokens effectively represent a debt or right under contract and will probably be considered things in action . However , not all tokens give purchasers a right against the issuer . The terms of one recent token sale by start-up firm Block.one – – specified that the tokens . Legal uncertainty This lack of legal protection may suit crypto-currencies ’ “ ” origins . Individuals trading secure tokens online don ’ t need protection from “ ” ( industrial governments ) . But when mainstream consumers buy digital tokens , disputes are bound to arise . For example , if digital tokens are property , they will form part of your estate when you die and your heirs will inherit them . But whoever has the private key technically controls the tokens , creating a potential conflict . The issue has arisen before a . The estate of the deceased Dave Kleiman , who allegedly seized up to 1m bitcoin , worth billions of dollars . The estate is suing for return of the tokens under what is known as the tort of conversion , which in England and Wales . Some commentators whether Wright – a colourful character who once – ever had the tokens to begin with . But the case shows how the outcome of disputes can depend on the property status of digital tokens . Similar issues could arise in cases of theft , bankruptcy , . Few investors will have given much thought to the legal status of their crypto-currency . But in the long term a lack of legal protection could further diminish the tokens ’ value , particularly if it stops financial concepts such as being applied . Admittedly , the value of digital tokens so far has anyway been volatile and unpredictable . But the resulting legal disputes may force property lawyers to confront a new , virtual world of digital assets . In future , the law could to digital tokens , for instance by recognising a new category of – but this would probably require . For now , the property status of digital tokens remains an “ ” , as one of the UK ’ s Supreme Court justices recently put it . So caveat emptor : bitcoin buyer , beware .
Bitcoin ’ s successor ? More consistent values might make ‘ stablecoins ’ a safer cryptocurrency option December 6 , 2018 11.05am GMT University of Strathclyde Author Lead Security Engineer , University of Strathclyde Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin has plunged from a high of almost US $ 20,000 in December 2017 to as . So it ’ s understandable that some cryptocurrency users might be looking for more stability . With the and other cryptocurrencies uncertain , a possible new solution known as “ stablecoins ” has emerged . This cryptocurrency aims to hold its value better than others , which could offer investors more stability . Cryptocurrencies are digital tokens that act as a form of currency , effectively allowing people to perform transactions without a bank or intermediary . Most cryptocurrencies have no intrinsic value , and get their price from . This , from those hoping values will rise , has led to in cryptocurrencies . Unlike other cryptocurrencies , stablecoins aim to maintain their worth better by being redeemable for something else of tangible value , like such as US dollars , or even gold . The stablecoins ’ underlying asset ( the monetary value that investors expect it to trade at ) would normally be deposited with a trusted bank . If people are confident they can redeem these coins in exchange for said currency , and that the issuer has sufficient reserves for all coins in circulation , the price of the stablecoin shouldn ’ t fall below the underlying asset value . The most widely used stablecoins are , and , which bind their value to the US dollar . Tether experienced some , fluctuating between $ 0.989 and $ 0.95 . TrueUSD has held stable , but USD Coin has had slight instability – though even its biggest drop still remained within 1.8 % of the dollar . Compared with other cryptocurrencies , then , stablecoins have remained stable . But there ’ s nothing technical keeping the price of stablecoins at a fixed value . If people lose confidence that the issuer has enough assets reserved to honour the value of all coins if redeemed , it could . The price could also rise if demand outstrips supply of a stablecoin . Why are stablecoins becoming popular ? The and , alongside across exchanges , have influenced the perception that cryptocurrencies are unpredictable . The idea of a cryptocurrency with a fixed value has understandable appeal , especially among those wanting to . Cryptocurrency exchanges are also moving away from interacting with banking systems because of heightened regulatory interest and attention in cryptocurrency operations . In , exchanges have even had their . This has led some popular cryptocurrency exchanges to no longer allow transactions . So , in order to buy on these exchanges , people need existing cryptocurrencies – making stablecoins a good option for starting out . Will computer algorithms maintain stability ? are the latest development . These use computer algorithms to control the stablecoin ’ s availability by buying and selling it automatically based on real-time prices , ideally keeping the coin ’ s price stable . If prices rise , coins from reserves would be made available to buy , which increases supply and reduces price . If the price falls , the algorithm can buy back coins ( using other cryptocurrencies held in reserves ) to reduce supply and increase the price . But if supply increases too rapidly , the algorithm won ’ t have sufficient funds to buy back enough coins to stabilise the price . This could cause the value to plummet , especially if people lose confidence in the coin issuer . However , this can also happen to , , as currencies are only valuable if others will accept it – otherwise , it significantly loses worth . The future Stablecoins might present a solution to short-term volatility , provided the currency backing its value remains stable in worth . But they won ’ t fix confidence losses , especially if the value of the stablecoin ’ s reserved assets is questioned . If the ability to redeem this currency is at risk , the stablecoin ’ s price . Seigniorage-based cryptocurrencies may handle limited volatility if they have enough reserves to control supply with algorithmic buying and selling . But this still requires people to willingly hold or accept the coin . Flash price crashes that occur when lots of a cryptocurrency is sold in a short time are , showing the real potential for extreme volatility due to large transactions . There ’ s also a significant to purchase other cryptocurrencies . At time of writing , it cost more to buy one Bitcoin using Tether than US dollars , despite both supposedly having the same underlying value . If the market saw stablecoins as a solution to cryptocurrency volatility , the price would be the same as it is with cash . While stablecoins might reduce the amount of risk buyers see in cryptocurrency , especially related to price instability , it ’ s unlikely they ’ ll actually be used more generally . Using stablecoins for day-to-day transactions has many challenges , especially if the system can ’ t make more coins available if demand increases . Stablecoins also aren ’ t protected by the some cash bank accounts are , making it unlikely most people will replace their cash accounts . Read more : Regular cryptocurrencies also offer potentially higher returns than stablecoins , which appeals to risk-takers . are also exploring ways to take advantage of cryptocurrencies ’ price volatility , as this creates more opportunity for profit and will attract investors . This isn ’ t to say stablecoins have no future . People living in countries with could use stablecoins to digitally hold a more stable foreign currency . However , while stablecoins could be more secure than real currencies in some situations , the values will still fluctuate if people lose confidence in their worth . Despite the volatile market , cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin remain popular with investors and ordinary people hoping to . While stablecoins might seem a shrewd alternative , it ’ s unlikely people will trade their chance to earn millions for security .
The Bitcoin bubble is perhaps the most extreme speculative bubble since the late 19th century . How low will Bitcoin now go ? The history of price bubbles provides some clues December 10 , 2018 3.33am GMT The University of Western Australia Author Associate Professor , Finance , The University of Western Australia Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Nearly 170 years before the invention of Bitcoin , the journalist Charles Mackay noted the way whole communities could “ fix their minds upon one object and go mad in its pursuit ” . Millions of people , he wrote , “ become simultaneously impressed with one delusion , and run after it , till their attention is caught by some new folly more captivating than the first ” . His book , published in 1841 , identifies a series of speculative bubbles – where people bought and sold objects for increasingly steep prices until suddenly they didn ’ t . The best-known example he cites is the tulip mania that gripped the Netherlands in the early 17th century . Tulip bulbs soared in value to sell for up to 25,000 florins each ( close to A $ 45,000 in today ’ s money ) before their price collapsed . The Bitcoin bubble other cases identified by Mackay . It is perhaps the most extreme bubble since the late 19th century . In four years its price surged almost 2,800 % , reaching a peak of US $ 19,783 in December 2017 . It has since fallen by 80 % . A month ago it was trading at more than US $ 6,000 ; it is now down to US $ 3,500 . Read more : That ’ s still a fantastic gain for anyone who bought Bitcoin before May 2017 , when it was worth less than US $ 2,000 , or before May 2016 , when it was worth less than $ 500 . But will it simply keep dropping ? What makes Bitcoin worth anything ? To begin to answer this question , we need to understand what creates the values that drive speculative price bubbles , and then what causes prices to plunge . The above chart shows the magnitude of the Bitcoin bubble compared with the price movement of Japanese property and dot-com bubble from four years prior to their peak until four years after . When asset values diverge We typically think about bubbles in financial assets such as stocks or bonds , but they can also occur with physical assets ( such as property ) or commodities ( like tulip bulbs ) . A bubble begins when the price people are willing to pay for something deviates significantly from its “ intrinsic value ” . The intrinsic value of an asset is theoretical , based its “ fundamental ” value . Fundamental value includes : the ability to generate cash flow ( e.g . interest or rental income ) ; scarcity or rarity value ( e.g . gold or diamonds ) ; and potential use ( e.g . silver and platinum are used in both jewellery and industrial operations ) . A house may have fundamental value owing to the scarcity of land , its use as a home , or its ability to generate rental income . A tulip ( or Bitcoin ) has none of those things ; even the presumed scarcity does not exist when you consider all of the alternative flowers ( or cryptocurrencies ) available . Price bubble preconditions A bubble tends to occur after a sustained period of economic growth , when investors get used to the price of an asset always increasing and credit is easily accessible . To these conditions something more must be added for a bubble to form . That is typically a major disruption or innovation , such as the development of a new technology . Think of railways in the 19th century , electricity in the early 20th century , and the internet at the end of the 20th century . Initially most investors tend to be cautious and “ rational ” about a new technology . For instance , early investment in railways took advantage of limited competition and focusing on profitable routes only . It was gradual and commercially successful . This creates higher growth and profitability , leading to positive feedbacks ( from greater investment , higher dividend payouts , and increased consumer spending ) , which raises confidence further . If conditions allow , this develops into a period the economic historian described as “ ” : investors become fixated on the ability to make a profit by selling the asset to a “ greater fool ” at an even higher price . That is , they are attracted not by “ fundamental ” motives – the benefits from potential cash-flows such as dividend or rental income – but by “ speculative ” motives – the pursuit of short-term capital gains . Higher prices attract a greater number of speculators , pushing prices higher still . Uncertainty around the significance of the new technology allows extreme valuations to be rationalised , although the justifications seem weaker as prices rise further . The virtuous cycle of ever-rising prices continues , often fuelled by credit , until there is an event that leads to a pause in price rises . Kindleberger suggests this can be a change in government policy or an unexplained failure of a firm . When asset prices stop rising , investors who have borrowed to finance their purchases realise the cost of interest payments on their debt will not be offset by the capital gain to be made by holding onto the asset . So they cut their losses and start to sell the asset . Once the price starts falling , more investors decide to sell . Bitcoin ’ s bubble Observers of the cryptocurrency market will find this story familiar . Bitcoin emerged following one of the in history , with easily accessible credit , and global interest rates at their lowest levels in . The surge in price attracted speculators into the Bitcoin market , helped by intense media attention . There are cases of individuals paying for Bitcoin by using credit cards or by . The rationale for higher prices became more fantastical , with claims the price could rise to $ 100,000 , despite . Read more : The possible triggers for a pause in Bitcoin price rises included concerns about increased government regulation of crypto-assets and the possibile introduction of central bank digital currencies , as well as the large theft of assets and collapse of exchanges that have . Going down In liquid markets such as stocks ( where it is inexpensive to buy and sell assets in large values ) the price decline can be steep . In illiquid markets , where assets can not easily be sold for cash , the fall can be brutal . Examples include the mortgage-backed securities ( MBS ) and collateralised debt obligations ( CDOs ) that led to the Global Financial Crisis . Bitcoin is . This is due to a large number of different Bitcoin exchanges competing ; often substantial transaction costs , and of the Blockchain to record transactions . The aftermath The aftermath of a bursting bubble can be brutal . The stock market crash of 1929 was a prelude to the Great Depression of the 1930s . The collapse in Japanese asset values after 1989 heralded a decade of low growth and deflation . The dot-com crash of 2000-01 destroyed US $ 8 trillion of wealth . The effect of a crash depends the size , ownership and importance of the asset involved . The effect of the tulip crash was limited because tulip speculations involved a relatively small number of people . But sharp declines in property values during 2007 led to the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression . Bitcoin is more like tulips . The entire market valuation was about US $ 300 billion at the peak . To put this into context , the US stock and housing markets are currently valued more than US $ 30 trillion each ( the equivalent Australian markets are valued at A $ 2 trillion and A $ 6.9 trillion respectively ) . Relatively few investors own the majority – it is estimated that . This suggests the effects on the wider economy of the Bitcoin crash should be contained . Estimating Bitcoin ’ s intrinsic value The true value of cryptocurrencies is widely debated . Bitcoin entrepreneurs suggest a much higher price is justified . Others , such as Eugene Fama ( a Nobel Prize winner ) and Warren Buffett believe it is close to worthless . The has described it as “ a combination of a bubble , a Ponzi scheme and an environmental disaster ” . Read more : Obtaining a realistic estimate of Bitcoin ’ s intrinsic value is tricky because it is not an asset that generates a periodic cash flow , such as interest or rental income . For such an asset , value ultimately depends on what others are willing to pay for it . This often relates to scarcity . This does not provide a positive story for Bitcoin . Though the total number of Bitcoins is limited , there are many competing , virtually indistinguishable cryptocurrencies ( such as Ehtereum and Ripple ) . Bitcoin also . Its the price movements are too volatile to be a unit of account . The transaction capacity of the Blockchain is too limited for it to be a medium of exchange . Nor does it appear to be a good store of value . Since it produces no income , has limited scarcity value , and few people are willing to use Bitcoin as currency , it is even possible that Bitcoin has no intrinsic value .
Five reasons Bitcoin could enter a more extreme death spiral January 2 , 2019 10.05am GMT Warwick Business School , University of Warwick Author Assistant Professor of Finance , Warwick Business School , University of Warwick Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Back in December 2017 , when its price reached , Bitcoin looked like it had finally disrupted financial markets with the potential to . A year later and things looked quite different . Bitcoin is now steadily trading below US $ 4,000 and has been constantly on a downward ride over the last year , losing more than half of its market capitalisation . And yet cryptocurrency enthusiasts seem to ignore the fact that Bitcoin could yet enter an even more extreme death spiral . Bitcoin is not the only cryptocurrency whose market capitalisation has been hammered . Sell offs have happened across the board , with the price of major alternative coins such as Ripple and Ethereum falling in the past year . It is not clear what the catalyst was for these price drops and selling . But what is clear is that cryptocurrency prices struggle to find a floor for a number of reasons . These range from the rising cost of mining , regulatory concerns , market manipulation , speculative trading , sky high power consumption , and the increasing scepticism from both the public and the world ’ s established financial industry . 1 . Rising cost of mining If its price continues to drop and the mining costs do not fall to the same extent , the incentives to update the public ledger and validate transactions can quickly disappear , threatening the very existence of Bitcoin as a viable payment system . Bitcoin is dependent on a that verify transactions and record them on a digital ledger called the blockchain . This prevents copies being made of the digital tokens . As a reward for the energy and time involved , . But the amount of work involved in mining keeps increasing ( making it more costly ) , as the mining process was always designed to get more and more difficult , to limit the number of new Bitcoin that get issued . Seeing as mining requires vast amounts of energy , a number of miners have , as Bitcoin ’ s declining value has made mining less profitable . This is worrying for Bitcoin ’ s viability as there needs to be a minimum number of miners at work to maintain the public blockchain ledger . Without the mining activity , cryptocurrencies are just a set of encrypted numbers with no value . Any rational investor would stand clear of mining if the cost of mining is higher than the future price . 2 . Regulatory concerns Regulators across the world are beginning to act on cryptocurrencies with diverging views . While countries like and are trying to become hubs for cryptocurrency businesses , others like and the have cracked down on cryptocurrency markets . A case in point comes from the US markets regulator , the SEC . It that operators of two ( ICOs ) must pay fines and restitution as they broke the law by selling unlicensed securities . This hardly comes as a surprise . In fact , it is likely only the beginning of a decisive intrusion of regulatory bodies in the opaque ecosystem of ICOs . Such a development might be enough to spook some investors to abandon cryptocurrencies altogether . Read more : Advocates of cryptocurrencies insist that more institutional investors will get involved in the space thanks to new products such as crypto-specific exchange-traded funds ( ETFs ) . They expect these to take off in the same way that ETFs have become massively popular . But the SEC has not approved any crypto ETFs , and it would be overly optimistic to assume that this will happen in the near future . 3 . Market manipulation Market manipulation and speculative activity are also important concerns when it comes to the crypto market , which could have been priced into recent performance . My how well-informed traders buy cryptocurrencies in bulk , which pushes the price up and gets other buyers to follow suit , until the well-informed traders sell and send the price down , which again everybody follows . Again , this hardly comes as a surprise . Cryptocurrency markets are incredibly opaque . Anyone paying attention to cryptocurrency trading knows that this kind of pump-and-dump activity and fictitious orders are designed to artificially move prices , exacerbating price swings at the expenses of , perhaps unsophisticated , retail investors . 4 . Power consumption A third concern behind the constant price drop is the increasing costs of equipment and electricity . Bitcoin mining is incredibly power hungry . And this power demand is becoming so high in regions where mining is concentrated , such as Canada , that authorities are starting to . Read more : Again , this could threat the very survival of any cryptocurrency which is based on mining . This represents the vast majority . 5 . Industry scepticism Large drops in prices are accompanied by a persistent scepticism around cryptocurrencies . To some extent this is due to the fact that the promise to bypass the mainstream , centralised economic system and enable peer-to-peer payments has been disappointing so far . Major players in the world of finance , such as Berkshire Hathaway ’ s and JP Morgan Chief Executive , constantly express their deep scepticism of cryptocurrencies , suggesting Bitcoin and the likes still face an uphill battle for acceptance . The one upside to all this is that , although cryptocurrencies may have entered a death spiral , the blockchain economy is here to stay . As well as allowing safe peer-to-peer lending and transactions , it is being used to build more efficient supply chains and in the evolution of the internet of things – to name just a few of its applications . This will only grow as it is applied to everything from to the .
Is blockchain all hype ? A financier and supply chain expert discuss January 31 , 2019 3.53pm GMT International Institute for Management Development ( IMD ) Authors Professor of Strategy and Supply Chain Management , International Institute for Management Development ( IMD ) Professor of Finance , International Institute for Management Development ( IMD ) Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages This is an article from , a series in which academics from different disciplines chew over current debates . Let us know what else you ’ d like covered – all questions are welcome . Details of how to contact us are at the end of the article . Arturo Bris : Have you ever watched footage from the early 1980s of people trying to explain the internet ? They ’ re sceptical and confused and have no idea how to say “ @ ” , which is comical given what we now take for granted . But that ’ s where we are with blockchain now . People don ’ t believe in it because they don ’ t understand it . Blockchain is a technology with two ingredients : the first is a , meaning a database with identical copies held by everyone in a network . There is no intermediary , no central data depository . The second is a ( and this is the true innovation in the technology ) : the ability to digitally agree on any change in the data . It is the set of decision rules by which any new entry in the database is accepted and then shared by everyone . The consensus algorithm will be different for every blockchain – some work on a simple majority rule , some ( such as Bitcoin ) have a subset of members paid to fulfil that role , and others have much more complicated arrangements . The structure of the database is also particular , because it is structure as a sequence of entries ( a ledger ) , not a deposit . If you don ’ t understand blockchain , , because it ’ s an amazing new technology that ’ s going to revolutionise the world . It ’ s going to monetise and unlock value that today is hidden . The social impact is going to be massive . It ’ s going to permit new avenues for human interaction that didn ’ t exist before . Carlos Cordon : I ’ m not sure about that , Arturo . I , for instance , understand what blockchain is , but I don ’ t believe that it ’ s going to have the impact you describe . Blockchain requires having a lot of copies of the same data . This means that you are required to multiply the data storage by , let ’ s say , 100 times . The same data is stored in 100 places . That might work for something as standard and simple as money : Bitcoin works , for example , because there is just one Bitcoin , not thousands of different products . But if you think about supply chains , for example , you ’ re talking about thousands of products . For each product , a lot of information is required , like weight , format , expiry date , composition , etc . This means that blockchain is extremely impractical for many of the applications that its evangelists . Amazon isn ’ t using blockchain . Google isn ’ t . In fact , none of the top digital giants are , although Amazon has said it ’ s happy to provide cloud storage for it . The Nobel prize-winning economist Paul Krugman Bitcoin will “ set the monetary system back 300 years ” . AB : Krugman also said in 2011 that the Euro , and look where we are today . And , with respect to Google and Amazon , that ’ s exactly what disruptive technologies are : they are not usually adopted by the established players , because they disrupt their own – established – business models . And by the way , more and more companies are using blockchain for applications beyond cryptocurrencies . These include , , , – the list goes on . Blockchain is a technology that guarantees full security ( it can not be hacked ) because data are already shared by the members of the network , so there is nothing to hack . We are already seeing the transformation moving extremely fast , and that ’ s why you need to embrace it . CC : The way blockchain works makes it secure and trustworthy , that much is true . But if we introduce blockchain into , for example , we ’ re firstly trying to solve a problem that isn ’ t there – and , secondly , we ’ re possibly creating further problems for ourselves . This is because trust in supply chains generally isn ’ t an issue . Let ’ s imagine I ’ m Unilever or Procter & Gamble . Am I going to try to cheat Walmart or Carrefour ? No . We have a certain level of trust . We may disagree , but we don ’ t cheat . But with blockchain comes complete transparency . And we don ’ t want that . Not because we don ’ t trust the other partner , but because we use information to negotiate . Besides , in supply chains we ’ ve been working on sharing information and data for years . We don ’ t need new data technologies . It ’ s already complicated enough . AB : I have no problem with that . If trust does not need to be formalised , there is no need for blockchain . I don ’ t think we will use blockchain to manufacture cookware or to design new means of transportation either . But what makes blockchain revolutionary is the transformation of physical assets into digital ones . This is known as . Cryptocurrencies , for example , are the tokenization of money , but that is only one example . You can tokenize stocks and financial assets , property , music , services – the list goes on . By replicating assets with a digital token , we can facilitate transactions without physical delivery . CC : Then there ’ s the challenge of a potential mismatch between the virtual value chain and the physical value chain . You can tokenize assets , but what happens if someone changes the physical product ? Blockchain couldn ’ t have prevented the UK horsemeat scandal , for example , where horsemeat was found in products that supposedly contained only beef . Meanwhile , the need for storage is going to multiply by an order of magnitude as copies of all these ledgers are held by each individual in a blockchain . And the only people who are going to benefit from that are companies like Amazon , selling cloud storage . AB : This is a fallacy . In fact , the structure of a blockchain allows us to store the whole database by storing just a small part of it . I know this is difficult to understand . In fact what happens is that , through encryption , we will be able to drastically reduce the size of the entries . Second , because of the sequential nature of the database , and since all entries are linked both to the previous and the next one , we will need to store just the last block ( s ) of the database . Overall , I think that we need to think beyond the storage of data and contracts as the main uses of blockchain . Tokenization will transform our transactions . Besides , the lack of need for intermediaries will also transform organisations . We can develop a new type of organisation that is democratic , not in the sense that it doesn ’ t need a CEO but in the sense of a decentralised autonomous organisation that is super efficient . This is going to be the future . By monetising assets that we currently do not monetise – such as our social capital , our fitness data , our attention to advertisers – we will add value . And that is only possible through a technology so new and complex that we ’ re still struggling to explain to each other how it works . CC : OK . But so far , I have seen no evidence of blockchain being used for truly revolutionary purposes . Walmart is using it to track vegetables . I saw a headline recently : “ ” – Yellow Pages died 20 years ago , why are they trying to resuscitate that concept ? Blockchain is certainly one of the top strategic tech trends at the moment but from looking at what companies are actually doing with it , I don ’ t think it ’ s going to change the world . If there ’ s a specific topic or question you ’ d like experts from different disciplines , you can : Email your question to josephine.lethbridge @ theconversation.com Tell us on Twitter by tagging @ ConversationUK with the hashtag # HeadtoHead , or Message us on Facebook .
Canadian CEO Gerald Cotten died in December , taking to his grave the passwords to unlock his cryptocurrency clients ’ millions . Regulations needed after cryptocurrency CEO takes passwords to his grave March 3 , 2019 3.10pm GMT Updated March 5 , 2019 3.06am GMT University of Toronto Author Professor of Finance , University of Toronto Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages A featuring cryptocurrencies has been unfolding in a Canadian court recently . The antics that led to the litigation almost defy credulity , and they highlight the need for new regulations to better suit a financial marketplace that includes virtual currencies . in early February that Canadian cryptocurrency exchange QuadrigaCX was seeking creditor protection , leaving in financial limbo about 115,000 people who had entrusted the firm to maintain their deposits of cash , Bitcoins and other digital tokens worth an estimated C $ 250 million . The company ’ s need for bankruptcy protection arose when its founder and chief operator , Gerald Cotten , . Normally , if a financial institution ’ s executive officer meets an untimely demise , he or she doesn ’ t bring to the afterworld the only keys to the vault . And thus clients maintain continued access their deposited funds all the while . In the case of Quadriga , unfortunately , Cotten was the only living soul who knew the password to an encrypted offline repository , known as cold storage , where the firm had enshrined the vast majority of clients ’ cryptocurrency deposits . Without the password , no one can access those holdings . Murky or absent regulations While the Nova Scotia Supreme Court wades its way through some very novel and complex issues , the question that comes to my mind is : How has one bad decision about password custodianship caused more than 100,000 people to lose access to their deposits ? The answer lies in the murky and mostly lacking regulations that govern the cryptocurrency world . Nothing stops entrepreneurs like Cotten from running companies like Quadriga with no independent oversight . Had he ever raised equity capital from investors in return for tokens or coins , that process would have been governed by Canadian securities regulations . But because Quadriga is an exchange — maintaining deposits and facilitating conversions between regular cash and cryptocurrencies , but not issuing cryptocurrencies in exchange for ownership shares — it operates in a regulatory vacuum . In Canada , the ( OFSI ) oversees banks that take regular dollar deposits . One might argue that the OFSI umbrella ought to be adapted to include oversight of virtual exchanges like Quadriga , even though such institutions are not technically banks and their deposits are non-traditional in nature . That oversight would impose accounting standards and reporting requirements that would help prevent the sorts of irresponsible missteps that put Quadriga depositors in such a precarious position . A likely side benefit of regulatory supervision would be the eventual development of standardized safeguards against hackers and other cybercriminal activity that plagues the cryptocurrency world . Lack of regulations attractive to some A feature that draws many crypto enthusiasts to the virtual currency sector is the very fact that it lacks government oversight , and those individuals will bristle at any hint of new regulations . Read more : Members of the general public might also be leery of new laws lest they grant an undeserved sheen of legitimacy to cryptocurrencies , which are not suitable investments for anyone except the most risk-loving of speculators . But in Canada , we regulate many industries that are risky or distasteful to some , including gambling , alcohol , tobacco and marijuana . The underlying calculus is that providing standards for certain illicit activities is preferable to driving those activities to the black market , where the risks would be amplified . For instance , a benefit of buying my beloved guilty pleasure of choice , craft gins , from a regulated marketplace is that I can imbibe confident in the knowledge that my cocktails are free from wood alcohol . Three cheers for avoiding blindness ! We can not protect Canadians from all possible risks , especially when it comes to financial markets . And to be clear , I am not suggesting that we indemnify cryptocurrency speculators against losses that may arise from taking calculated risks , such as the beating that some fortune-seekers have taken since Bitcoin valuations plummeted from stratospheric heights . Rather , I propose that depositors ought not to be penalized for the indiscretions of the custodians to whom they entrust their financial holdings . This is a corrected version of a story originally published on March 3 , 2019 . The earlier story said US $ 250 million instead of C $ 250 million .
The future of blockchain according to experts in the energy sector March 5 , 2019 12.12pm GMT Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Authors Ph.D student , Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Professor of Energy Economics , Grenoble École de Management ( GEM ) Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Romanian electric power transmission lines . Blockchain technology is a decentralised digital ledger that keeps public but encrypted records of peer-to-peer transactions . All members of a blockchain network can verify whether a transaction occurred or not , rendering clearinghouses or other intermediaries obsolete . The technology originally served as the backbone of bitcoin , the well-known crypto-currency , and later made its way to other industries . In France , blockchain represents a vibrant industry as the nation trailblazes the way for the technology in the hope of becoming a blockchain hub in the European Union . The French minister of finance , Bruno Le Maire , believes that : “ The blockchain will offer new opportunities to our startups , for example , with initial coin offerings that will allow them to raise funds through tokens. ” In December 2018 , two French members of Parliament , Jean-Michel Mis and Laure de La Raudière , submitted a recommending that the French Government invest 500 million euros on public blockchain endeavors over the next three years in order to build a “ blockhain nation ” . The unique characteristics of blockchain technology ( lower transaction costs , increased transparency and enhanced security ) are creating new opportunities for the French electricity sector . A few start-ups such as or are currently establishing blockchain-based projects with the main aim of further decentralizing existing energy systems . Several barriers to the wide adoption of blockchain however are yet to be overcome . Where is the blockchain headed ? In this context , the conducted by Grenoble Ecole de Management ( GEM ) in December 2018 asked experts for their opinion on where blockchain is headed in the French energy sector . As a first finding , the experts were almost equally split in their opinion on whether blockchain will play a rather important or a rather unimportant role in the French electricity system of tomorrow . To understand the importance of blockchain technology in the energy sector and the challenges that it faces , the experts were asked for their opinion on the viability of specific blockchain applications and the potential benefits , as well as the barriers currently limiting a wider diffusion of the technology in France . According to the experts , the most promising applications of blockchain technology in the electricity sector in the next five years , are “ peer-to-peer energy trading ” and “ electric vehicle charging and sharing ” . The blockchain promises to create a system whereby energy prosumers from the commercial sector or private homes can trade electricity without the interference of a central authority . With the continuous growth of electric vehicles , blockchain promises to provide an adequate , publicly available charging infrastructure that tackles the “ lack of range ” challenge , by enabling individuals to make their private EV charging stations available for public use for a fee . Currently , the majority of players in the blockchain for energy market are trying to enact some form of peer-to-peer energy trading . In 2017 , Enedis , working with the French start-up Sunchain and the Departmental Council of Pyrénées-Orientales , launched one of the first P2P energy sharing projects in France . The project , DIGISOL , explored the use of blockchain technology to share solar energy between individuals within the same building ( collective auto-consumption ) . A large-scale deployment of the technology for P2P energy trading however is still inexistent in France . Which blockchain use case do you see as most viable for applying the technology within the energy sector in France in the next five years ? Blockchain technology is interesting for its potential to decentralise energy markets and improve flexibility . blockchain enables real-time coordination of electricity supply and demand data that can improve demand-side energy efficiency . blockchain solutions can also be used to accurately monitor and control energy performance in real-time , which will ultimately increase supply side efficiency . In effect , blockchain provides companies with ways to efficiently track energy usage and generation , and to identify network anomalies , which can improve response time in case of a failure or a blackout . In France , ENGIE is exploring the use of blockchain technology to monitor water , natural gas and energy flows . The company has also partnered with different blockchain players , such as , which specializes in security and infrastructure solutions for cryptocurrencies and blockchain applications , to develop blockchain for energy market solutions . What potential benefits can blockchain bring to the energy sector in France ? However , the experts also identified key barriers that limit the widespread diffusion of blockchain technology . Unclear regulatory and legal framework Blockchain solutions are rapidly growing and innovating far ahead of existing regulations . Clear legal definitions and regulatory frameworks are needed in order to clear up the current level of uncertainty that is associated with blockchain . The French government , along with players in the blockchain ecosystem , is still working on establishing favorable regulations and legal frameworks for the technology . In December 2018 , the French Accounting Standards Authority established a regulation that defines the accounting rules applicable to Initial Coin Offerings ( ICO ; a highly popular approach to raise capital in the blockchain space ) issuers , ICO investors , and organizations that hold any type of crypto currency or crypto-asset . However , several issues such as intellectual-property , data privacy , and enforceability of contracts remain to be addressed . Electricity consumption Current blockchain designs run on algorithms that can consume up to 215 kWh per transaction ( i.e. , the equivalent of letting an incandescent light bulb of 25W burn for a full year ) . This is mainly because validating and securing transactions on the blockchain requires huge computing power . For example , the servers that run bitcoin ’ s software are estimated to use at least 22 terawatt-hours ( TWh ) per year , which is almost the level of Ireland ’ s annual electricity consumption . An expansion of blockchain will require additional “ data mining ” and consequently additional energy consumption . A number of green-mining solutions that use renewable energy sources and more energy-efficient hardware are currently being tested . The green-energy startup , which operates two hydropower mining farms in the Austrian Alps is one example . What are the main barriers that are currently limiting a wider diffusion of blockchain technology within the energy sector in France ? Technical complexity Current blockchain designs are extremely difficult to develop , deploy and maintain . For the novice user , making a transaction on the blockchain can be challenging , as it requires technical knowledge and several sophisticated steps . A number of big IT players are currently providing cloud-based blockchain services intended to automate the setup of blockchain infrastructures . Future blockchain applications may need to adopt a plug-and-play infrastructure that is much more user-friendly in order to attain wider diffusion . The energy market barometers conducted in December 2018 among 112 experts from industry , science and public administration in France asked about the role of blockchain technology in the French energy sector . The results can be found . _
Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency : a financial expert breaks it down March 12 , 2019 1.23pm GMT Loughborough University Author Professor of Financial Economics , Loughborough University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook is to launch its own version of Bitcoin , for use in its messaging applications , WhatsApp , Messenger and Instagram . Could this “ Facecoin ” be the long-awaited breakthrough by a global technology giant into the lucrative market for retail financial services ? Or will it be yet another exaggerated “ crypto ” project , buying into the continuing excitement about decentralised peer-to-peer exchange but , in the end , not delivering very much ? Time will tell , but my two decades of research into the economics of payments makes me sceptical . We know little about Facebook ’ s plans . So far there is just one company statement about a new group set up to look into cryptocurrencies : “ Like many other companies , Facebook is exploring ways to leverage the power of blockchain technology . This new small team is exploring many different applications . We don ’ t have anything further to share. ” Some investigative journalism from Bloomberg and the reveals a little more . Facecoin ( and the similar “ Gram ” cryptocurrency being developed by the privacy focused messaging app Telegram ) will apparently be a “ ” . Rather than having a fixed amount of currency that fluctuates in price , depending on demand , Facecoin will have a fixed price and the amount of it in circulation will vary . So unlike Bitcoin it will not be a vehicle for speculation . What will the fixed price be ? Bloomberg reports it will be fixed against the dollar . The New York Times says that it will be against a combination of dollar , euro and yen . Who will use it ? Facebook is apparently focusing on providing a technology solution for the large and lucrative remittance market for payments into India . Will transactions in Facecoin be anonymous like those in Bitcoin ? No , they will be associated with Facebook accounts , so they won ’ t be an easy means to avoid laws and regulations . Reasons to be sceptical While this is a fascinating development , some scepticism is in order . If there is one common feature to the many hundreds of crypto and blockchain finance projects announced over the past four years , it is exaggerated early claims . In one ongoing research project , I have found that of 103 projects announced since 2015 applying so-called blockchain technologies to financial services , all but a handful have quietly disappeared . None have yet been taken through to commercial-scale launch ( although around half a dozen may achieve that by 2021 ) . Is there anything about Facebook ’ s plans to suggest a different outcome ? The obvious parallel is with the Chinese payment solution WeChat Pay , globally the largest mobile and internet payment solution used by “ ” . In Beijing and Shanghai “ ” that allow passers by to scan and give them money using their smart phones . The integration into the WeChat messaging system is what gave WeChat Pay the critical mass to achieve widespread acceptance . Facecoin ’ s integration with WhatsApp and other Facebook services could support a similarly rapid take-off . But WeChat Pay doesn ’ t involve cryptocurrency . It uses established server technologies to enable people to transfer money in and out of conventional bank accounts as well as to other users . The New York Times reports , rather surprisingly , that Facecoin ( unlike WeChat Pay ) will be based on integration with cryptoexchanges , which trade conventional money for digital currencies , rather than with the conventional banking system . But given that cryptoexchanges are coming under because of their lack of transparency and irregularities in how they operate , linking with them is hardly likely to encourage people to adopt Facecoin . It is also difficult to make sense of the intended use of Facecoin for remittances . Major banks already send dollars virtually instantaneously and costlessly from one country to another . Costs and inefficiencies arise in when converting funds to local currency and allocating them to a local bank account or for cash collection . The Facecoin technology will do nothing to address these problems . Who pays out ? Another question mark is about the backing for Facecoin . Unlike Bitcoin , which is not pegged to any other currency , Facecoin will need the backing of real money to maintain its fixed price . The safest approach will be full reserving : for every $ 1 of Facecoin issued , Facebook could hold $ 1 of reserves in a segregated account . is also possible but who then guarantees the safety of those reserves ? If reserves do not cover withdrawals , who is then responsible and what compensation is there for holders of Facecoin ? Facebook would need a banking licence and subject itself to the full burden of banking regulation . Ideally , reserves would be held with a central bank . But central banks will be reluctant to support a private currency . Perhaps the biggest reason for scepticism comes from the challenges Facebook already faces over user data , privacy and authenticity . If Facebook takes as big a role in daily payments as it already has in personal communications and social media , then it will become an even bigger target for the growing anti-trust movement that seeks to the tech giants . Fundamental change is possible . Cryptocurrency technologies to eliminate the instability of fractionally reserved banking . But this will have to be through a state currency replacing fractionally reserved bank transaction accounts and not through a private currency . It would probably be wiser for Facebook to outsource Facecoin to an established international bank . But then , of course , this wouldn ’ t be such a major disruption of established financial services .
Don ’ t end up like this person . How cryptocurrency scams work May 13 , 2019 11.37am BST University of North Carolina – Greensboro Author Professor of Management , University of North Carolina – Greensboro Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list have been scammed out of massive sums of real money . In 2018 , losses from cryptocurrency-related crimes amounted to . The criminals use both old-fashioned and new-technology tactics to swindle their marks in schemes based on digital currencies exchanged through online databases called blockchains . From , and , I can see that some cryptocurrency fraudsters rely on that use income from new participants to pay out returns to earlier investors . Others use , including automated software that interacts with Telegram , an internet-based instant-messaging system popular among people interested in cryptocurrencies . Even when a cryptocurrency plan is legitimate , fraudsters can still . An even more basic question arises , though : How are unsuspecting investors attracted to cryptocurrency frauds in the first place ? Fast-talking swindlers Some cryptocurrency fraudsters appeal to people ’ s greed , promising big returns . For example , an unknown group of entrepreneurs runs the scam bot iCenter , which is a . It doesn ’ t provide information on investment strategies , but somehow . The iCenter scheme operates through a group chat on Telegram . It starts with a small group of scammers who are in on the racket . They get a referral code that they share with others , in blogs and on social media , hoping to get them to join the chat . Once there , the newcomers see encouraging and exciting messages from the original scammers . Some newcomers decide to invest , at which point they are assigned an individual bitcoin wallet , into which they can deposit bitcoins . They agree to wait some period of time – 99 or 120 days – to receive a significant return . During that time , the newcomers often use with friends and contacts , bringing more people into the group chat and into the investment scheme . There ’ s no actual investment of the funds in any legitimate business . Instead , when new people join , the person who recruited them gets a percentage of the new funds , and the cycle continues , paying out to earlier participants from each round of newer investors . Some members work especially hard to bring in new funds , posting as enticements to join the scam . Lies and more lies Some scammers go for straight-up deception . The founders of scam cryptocurrency OneCoin by convincing people their . Other scams are based on impressing potential victims with jargon or claims of specialized knowledge . The Global Trading scammers claimed they took advantage of to profit from what is called arbitrage – simply buying cheaply and selling at higher prices . Really they just took investors ’ money . Global Trading used a bot on Telegram , too – investors could send a balance inquiry message and about how much was in their account , sometimes even seeing balances . With returns looking like that , who could blame people for with their friends and family on social media ? Exploiting friends and family Once a scheme has started , it stays alive – at least for a while – through social media . One person gets taken in by the promise of big returns on cryptocurrency investments and spreads the word to . Sometimes big names get involved . For instance , the kingpin behind and other alleged scams in India convinced a number of Bollywood celebrities to . ” He even tried to make himself , proclaiming himself a “ , ” as he investors between . Not all the celebrities know they ’ re involved . In one blog post , iCenter featured a video that purported to be an , holding a sign featuring iCenter ’ s logo . Videos of Justin Timberlake and Christopher Walken were deceptively edited so they appeared to praise iCenter , too . Fraudulent initial coin offerings Another popular scam technique is called an “ initial coin offering. ” A potentially legitimate investment opportunity , an initial coin offering essentially is a way for a startup cryptocurrency company to raise money from its future users : In exchange for sending active cryptocurrencies like bitcoin and ethereum , customers are promised a discount on the new cryptocoins . Many initial coin offerings have , with organizers engaging in cunning plots , even renting fake offices and creating fancy-looking marketing materials . In 2017 , a lot of hype and media coverage about cryptocurrencies fed a huge wave of initial coin offering fraud . In 2018 , collapsed , costing backers at least $ 100 million . Many of these projects had no original ideas – had copied ideas from other cryptocurrency efforts , or even plagiarized supporting documentation . Investors looking for returns in a new technology sector are still interested in blockchains and cryptocurrencies – but should beware that they are complex systems that are new even to those who are selling them . Newcomers and relative experts alike have fallen prey to scams . In an environment like the current cryptocurrency market , potential investors should be very careful to research what they ’ re putting their money into and be sure to find out who is involved as well as what the actual plan is for making real money – without defrauding others .
Cryptocurrencies are finally going mainstream – the battle is on to bring them under global control May 16 , 2019 1.06pm BST University of East London Author Senior Lecturer in Financial Law and Regulation , University of East London Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The high seas are getting lower . The 21st-century revolutionaries who have dominated cryptocurrencies are having to move over . Mainstream financial institutions are adopting these assets and the that enables them , in what is perhaps the most profound development since the birth of cryptocurrencies through the launch of bitcoin a decade ago . JP Morgan Chase has been leading the way , having JPM Coin earlier this year , the first cryptocurrency issued by a big international bank . When trials begin in the coming months , each JPM Coin will be redeemable for one US dollar , protecting this cryptocurrency from the characteristic of the likes of bitcoin . One of the main reasons for JP Morgan launching these coins is to offer large corporate clients a way of making international payments in real time . This could gradually replace the current global interbank funds transfer network known as , whose wire transfer payments can sometimes take a whole business day to settle . A few weeks later , the IMF and World Bank the launch of Learning Coin , a private blockchain and quasi-cryptocurrency designed to help them better understand the technology . Facebook , too , was interested in launching a cryptocurrency . Meanwhile , financial firm 20|30 became the first company to float on a mainstream regulated trading platform using blockchains , when it shares in the form of “ equity tokens ” similar to a cryptocurrency on the London Stock Exchange . It is all a far cry from the for creating bitcoins and blockchains in the first place : to decentralise finance away from the dollar-dominated system of fiat currencies and to gradually render financial institutions obsolete . Good , bad and ugly Yet this space remains attractive to those seeking to undermine US financial hegemony . Iran and Russia are launching state-backed , in response to US threats to disconnect them from the SWIFT payments system . This would enable these countries to join other blockchain-based payment networks , with the potential to steadily weaken the international payments system . Other threats to global finance from cryptocurrencies abound . Services making it easier to conceal their movement , cryptocurrency tumblers , are said to be enabling fraudulent activities . There is that cryptocurrencies are financing terrorism ; while they are supposedly also vulnerable to rogue states – the UN North Korea of stealing US $ 571m ( £441m ) from five cryptocurrency exchanges in Asia . When you combine these concerns with the steady shift of cryptocurrencies towards the mainstream , it makes many observers very nervous : cryptocurrencies well below 1 % of global trading , but they are growing fast . The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision , which oversees international banking , that cryptocurrencies were a risk to global financial stability , and advised banks to look at their direct and indirect exposure and protect themselves . Standard setting Cryptocurrency regulation a very grey area . These assets are traded on two types of platforms , known as centralised and decentralised exchanges . Centralised exchanges , such as Coinbase or Robinhood , are platforms for connecting buyers and sellers , which enable them to buy or sell digital currencies either for other digital currencies or fiat currencies . The platform takes a fee for each transaction , and the amount of regulation varies from country to country . On decentralised exchanges , such as , traders sell cryptocurrencies directly between one another . These comprise a proportion of trading , and tend to be unregulated . They are harder to control – not least because much of the activity on the dark net . The Financial Actions Task Force ( FATF ) , the global standard setter against financial crime , is working towards global regulation of cryptocurrences on centralised exchanges . It with industry representatives from around the world as part of a consultation to finalise global standards . This will inform proposals for regulation due to be announced by the FATF in June . One major aspect is Regulatory Technology ( RegTech ) , which refers to technology that makes it possible to identify cryptocurrency activities such as the identities of traders doing transactions on blockchains . It will be interesting to see what the FATF has to say next month about the adoption of a RegTech global standard , which many would argue is crucial to making cryptocurrencies more transparent . On many other regulatory issues , the world remains a patchwork . France , for example , is banning cryptocurrencies known as privacy coins , which are designed to make it particularly difficult to trace their owners . Ireland its Anti-Money Laundering Bill to include cryptocurrencies , while the UK in a similar direction – going beyond the existing relevant . Japan , seen as a world leader on crypto regulation , new rules capping the amount that traders can borrow from exchanges to trade cryptocurrencies . and are also looking at regulating cryptocurrency exchanges . The US , meanwhile , a clarification of the status of cryptocurrencies issued through initial coin offerings . Germany is regulate these , too . These moves are welcome but hardly sufficient in global terms . A single country can impose tough standards on its cryptocurrency exchanges , but when transactions involve another exchange located in another country with no regulation , there ’ s nothing the domestic authorities in the first country can do to track payments once they have been transferred . Equally , you don ’ t have to go too far to find holes in the system : the on money laundering don ’ t cater for tumbler services , for instance . Bringing enough countries onboard to make a major difference is not going to be straightforward , particularly with so much acrimony between Russia , China and the West at present . For global regulation to be far-reaching , it would also need to include the entire system – including decentralised exchanges , but they appear to be too problematic to focus on at the moment . All the same , there is clearly a growing desire to take the wildness out of blockchains and cryptocurrencies . These technologies are only going to become more mainstream ; and the greater their share of the global economy , the greater their threat to the system as a whole . At least as far as centralised exchanges are concerned , the days of cryptocurrencies ruled by romantic buccaneers and pirates are slowly coming to an end .
The world ’ s newest country ? With cryptocurrency launch , Facebook sets its path toward becoming an independent nation June 18 , 2019 9.53pm BST Syracuse University Author Assistant Professor of Communications ( Social Media ) & Magazine , News and Digital Journalism , Syracuse University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook has announced a plan to launch , adding another layer to its efforts to dominate global communications and business . including Visa , Spotify , eBay , PayPal and Uber – plus a ready-made around the world – Facebook is positioned to pressure countries and central banks to cooperate with its . In my view as a , Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg is clearly seeking to give his company even more , despite the potential dangers to society at large . In a sense , he is declaring that he wants Facebook to become a virtual nation , populated by users , powered by a self-contained economy , and headed by a CEO – Zuckerberg himself – who is . Facebook in the past , and is still wrestling with significant public concerns – and investigations – about its , and . Therefore , it ’ s important to see through the hype . People must , and whether they are doing it in the best interests of humankind – or whether they are just seeking to benefit the new class of elite technology executives . Humanity needs ethical leadership , and time to think through the potential repercussions of rapid technological change . That ’ s why , in my view , Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency by financial regulators until its design has been proved to be safe for all of global society . Understanding Libra Technology companies are interested in a . That could allow companies like Facebook and Twitter to bring in more users to their platforms , and from the new system . They also want to . That sector is worth , is enormously profitable , and yet has . The technical details of Facebook ’ s plans are still emerging , but it seems that the company is not seeking to compete with or other . Rather , Facebook is looking to replace the existing with an all-new setup , with Libra at its center . The company may be counting on increased public interest in , and its market strength , to overcome objections . However , I don ’ t believe Facebook should be allowed to like it has , as many see it , . Speeding global exchange There is definitely a need for ways to , and to provide access to financial services to the many . There is real potential to Libra , but there are likely to be ways to improve even more , developing a payment system that better serves the world as a whole . At least at the moment , the Libra is being designed as a form of . That has that Libra might someday be recognized as a sovereign currency , with Facebook acting as a “ ” that could compete with the central banks of countries around the world . It doesn ’ t help that Facebook is already positioning itself to evade by that will join an for the Libra . To protect consumers , regulators should look carefully at whether the new system supporting the Libra is sound . It may be that an entirely new set of financial rules and regulations is needed to shield the existing financial system from harm if the Libra becomes more popular than national currencies . At the very least , governments need to proceed slowly and carefully when new products may introduce systemic risks into our environment . Even the has acknowledged that . In my opinion , Libra ’ s planned launch in 2020 does not allow enough time to fully vet this technology and its risks . Protecting the global financial system Financial regulations have developed over time to encourage , and to protect regular customers from fraudsters and corporate greed . There are also rules that help governments prevent and detect . This is not to say that all payments and purchases should be tied to a . and is key to privacy and personal freedoms . As new digital financial services , methods of electronic payment and currencies develop and become popular , they should not be allowed to undermine longstanding , even in the name of smoother , cheaper transactions . My concern is not just about large-volume transactions . Facebook has shown how even small amounts of money can buy with the power to influence public opinion and election outcomes in the U.S. and around the world . Product design and risk assessment Facebook has a long history of . The public , and their representatives in government – including elected officials , financial regulators and – should carefully scrutinize all aspects of Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency plans . This concern is especially urgent because Facebook also has a long history of launching products and services , like political ads and , without fully considering their potential to damage democracy and the global society at large . The company has demonstrated its inability to serve society beneficially – and it . All the signals suggest that customers and regulators alike should carefully examine whether Facebook ’ s Libra is or just a way to avoid restrictions on a potentially hazardous financial product . Defending democracy Facebook ’ s entrance into the financial industry is a threat to democracies and their citizens around the world , on the same scale as disinformation and information warfare , which also depend on social media for their effectiveness . It may be hard for world leaders to understand that this is an emergency , as they can not see the virtual powers aligning against them . But they must huddle quickly to – and keep – the from technology companies ’ greed . It will be key to understand if Facebook ’ s future cryptocurrency will ultimately function more like anonymous cash , or more like a traceable credit card transaction . Facebook has the blockchain and encryption technology to create an anonymous digital cash-like system , or a private digital currency , . Anonymity would heighten the risks of abuse such as money laundering , so it ’ s worth watching out for a cash-like Facebook cryptocurrency that mirrors the central banks ’ cash system . In addition , I can not help but reflect on the name that Facebook chose for this , the Libra , which is a , once used to mint coins . In many ways the company that Mark Zuckerberg is building is beginning to look more like a Roman Empire , now with its own central bank and currency , than a corporation . The only problem is that this new nation-like platform is a controlled company and is run more like a than a sovereign country with democratically elected leaders . Even now , the company may have as some countries – and . In the wake of the not too distant , and the “ fake news ” and disinformation culture that is developing , people must slow down and fully evaluate disruptive technology of this magnitude . Society can not withstand a launch of a cryptocurrency in Facebook ’ s infamous “ ” style .
Facebook offers lofty ideals for its digital currency . Facebook claims Libra offers economic empowerment to billions – an economist is skeptical June 18 , 2019 10.54pm BST Boston University Author Senior lecturer , Boston University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list the cryptocurrency craze . Should we be concerned ? The social network site on June 18 said called with the help of 27 partners , including MasterCard , Visa , ebay and Uber . In simple terms , Libra is meant to replace the paper bills in your wallet or purse with a digital equivalent . But unlike other cryptocurrencies like bitcoin , Libra will be directly backed by assets . describing the vision for this new currency is filled with laudable goals such as creating economic opportunity and advancing financial inclusion . But it will take time to completely understand the ramifications of Libra , which Facebook . As a , I believe there are economic benefits to Facebook ’ s cryptocurrency – but also some big potential downsides . The benefits of Libra Existing cryptocurrencies are not tied to physical assets . This makes them immune to the whims of national governments but also makes them prone to speculative bubbles and flash crashes . Libra , on the other hand , is going to be 100 % backed by assets . Every unit of Libra currency will be backed by an of bank deposits and short-term government securities in various major currencies . As a result , Libra will not suffer wild price fluctuations . And since it will be backed by a collection of international currencies and assets , it won ’ t be tied to the fortunes and policies of one country either . Another effect of being backed by assets is that it may help lower the risk of high inflation in countries across the world . made this very point in his book “ . ” Hayek believed everyone would be better off if people could pick among different types of private money , like Libra , instead of using government-issued money . Hayek believed issuing private money would banish inflation from the world since people would only use the currency most stable in value . A second economic benefit of Libra is that it will likely reduce the cost of transferring money around the world because the marginal cost of using it will be so low and Facebook is so prevalent , with about . As I have pointed out before , travelers and migrants to move money from one country to another . In a testament to the expected impact of Libra on the average cost of sending money , Facebook ’ s announcement – a major mover of money internationally – plummeting . The risks of a cash-free society If Libra is a success , it will surely speed up the movement toward more countries becoming . While some , such as Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg , may favor this outcome , I believe there are two important downsides to going cash-free . One is that it disenfranchises the , who would be pushed further to the margins of society and possibly become unable to take part in modern commerce . Although the price of an individual virtual currency transaction may be lower , there are still many nontrivial costs necessary to connecting to the digital society . For starters , you will need a smart phone and an internet connection to use Libra , both of which come with regular costs and fees . Concerns over disenfranchisement have lead to places like , and the laws to ban cashless stores . Second , a cashless society makes a country ’ s entire economy more vulnerable to disruptions . That ’ s because a cash-free economy depends on several things always working : a stable supply of electricity , constant communications networks and robust security . If one fails , digital transactions won ’ t work . Two recent news stories impressed on me just how vulnerable the power grid is . The U.S. government recently acknowledged that it ’ s deploying that could cripple it . That ’ s because the are already inside America ’ s power grid . Of course , there doesn ’ t need to be nefarious intent to see widespread power outages . Recently the in and . Tens of millions people were , and some had no power for a day . The same thing has happened in . Software viruses or accidents that shut down the electrical grid may not be lethal to humans but they can kill a cashless economy . Will Libra lives up to and empower billions of people ? Time will tell but meanwhile call me a skeptic . But the consequences of one day relying entirely on ones and zeroes to power our economies is worrisome .
Libra : four reasons to be extremely cautious about Facebook ’ s new currency June 20 , 2019 1.25pm BST University of East London Author Senior Lecturer in Financial Law and Regulation , University of East London Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages OK computer . Facebook libra , a cryptocurrency that will enable users to make international payments over Messenger and other group platforms like WhatsApp – perhaps from as soon as 2020 . Here ’ s how it looks likely to work : a user would buy libra and keep a balance of the currency in Facebook ’ s digital wallet , called Calibra . The user could either transfer currency to another user – say a family member in another country – or purchase items or services from a participating online retailer . Apart from Calibra , users could buy and sell libra through third party wallets or local resellers , such as grocery stores , in the same way as mobile phone owners already top up their data . A key rationale for libra , Facebook , is to facilitate financial inclusion . It would enable millions of users without bank accounts in far-flung parts of the world to transact in ways that formal financial systems have denied them . Because they could send and receive libra on a peer-to-peer basis , without the need for a bank , the transactions would be cheaper and faster , too . Libra appears designed to overcome a common criticism of existing cryptocurrencies like bitcoin and ethereum – don ’ t satisfy three essential characteristics of money : a medium of exchange ; a store of value and a unit of account . The argument goes that since they are not widely exchangeable , and since their widely fluctuating exchange values make them unattractive for storing wealth or pricing goods and services , they are not really viable as money . Where the exchange rate of other cryptocurrencies is purely driven by supply and demand , libra will be priced according to a basket of bank deposits and short-term government bonds in reputable currencies such as the dollar , pound and euro . It will therefore be a “ stable coin ” ; less likely to see the same fluctuations as other digital currencies . Having said that , the new currency raises a number of issues that need to be seriously considered before it launches : 1 . Facebook and data Facebook has tried to reassure the world by the management of libra to an independent foundation known as the Libra Association Council . Based in Geneva , this group will include representatives from mainstream financial institutions like PayPal , Mastercard and Visa , who have invested significantly in this project , as well as the likes of Uber , Spotify and Vodafone . This grouping is clearly designed to maximise participation in the new currency . Yet Facebook ’ s recent of data mishandling is still a cause for concern . Although Facebook assures that it would keep its users ’ social and financial data strictly separate , the question still remains : if it has mishandled social data in the recent past , can it be trusted with people ’ s financial data ? 2 . Money laundering Libra has huge implications for the anti-money laundering . Just like any financial intermediary taking on a new customer , Facebook will have to obtain various verification details through an online form for any users wanting to set up a Calibra wallet , including government-issued photo identification . But since users will be all over the world , how would Facebook authenticate the information provided ? It was the same issue faced by , a digital currency that operated out of Costa Rica and was used by money launderers to transfer billions of dollars worth of criminal proceeds until it was in 2013 . Prosecutors later described it as possibly the biggest money-laundering case in US history . Liberty Reserve operated in a similar way to PayPal , except with its own digital currency . It allowed users to register and transfer money to other users with only a name , email address , and birth date . No efforts were made to verify users ’ identities , and it attracted much illegal activity . Users would wire money from a traditional bank to a third party exchanger , which was usually unlicensed and not properly regulated . This exchanger would convert money to digital currency , which was untraceable from its original source , and was then deposited into a Liberty Reserve account . No limits were placed on transaction sizes . Liberty charged a 1 % service fee on each transfer and offered shopping cart functionality . All transactions were 100 % irrevocable . The investigation that led to Liberty ’ s closure was also very problematic as prosecutors required the cooperation of numerous jurisdictions with lax rules around anti-money laundering or investigating financial crime . Although libra will be backed by a host of blue chip companies , it looks potentially open to exactly the same kinds of problems . 3 . User security Facebook it would bear the cost of losses arising from hacks to the Calibra wallet , scams and loss of access to accounts . But how feasible is this even for a big tech company in the face of colossal losses ? Facebook or the Libra Association Council would need to accept the same requirements as any other bank to hold a certain level of capital to cover the cost of such eventualities . 4 . Systemic risk The sheer scale of this project is jaw-dropping . Facebook 2.4 billion monthly users , while WhatsApp 1.5 billion . Especially if Facebook leverages its relationship with and over , libra is likely to be global in a very short space of time . This has serious implications for global financial stability and systemic risk . Libra will clearly need proper global regulation , but this doesn ’ t really exist and is highly unlikely to emerge in the next year . Would it fall to one of the bodies that coordinate international banking – the Basel Committee on Banking Regulation , the Financial Actions Task Force or the Financial Stability Board – or to an association of global central banks ? Even this announcement , the lack of global regulation of cryptocurrencies was already a hot topic : discussions between countries and the main institutions involved in international finance are taking place to address this , but no institution designated to provide global oversight . If these issues can be addressed , libra would be poised to dominate the crypto space – and could very well become “ the ” global currency . In the absence of a single global regulatory regime , however , libra will require a strong degree of regulatory coordination around the world . That is a monumental challenge . At the very least , we could be seeing the start of a major shift .
Facebook co-founder Chris Hughes fears the Libra currency would insert a ‘ powerful new corporate layer of monetary control between central banks and individuals ’ . Facebook ’ s Libra plan : talk of the demise of central banks is greatly exaggerated June 24 , 2019 9.10pm BST University of Canberra Author Assistant professor , University of Canberra Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook ’ s proposed new digital currency , if even modestly successful , will hand over much of the control of monetary policy from central banks to Facebook and a group of partner companies including Uber and eBay . So says Chris Hughes , a Facebook co-founder . He calls the plan frightening . “ This currency would insert a powerful new corporate layer of monetary control between central banks and individuals , ” he writes in . But fear not , central banks are more resilient than this . What is Libra , and who is behind it ? At this point there ’ s no guarantee Facebook will succeed in establishing its own currency ( called the Libra ) that you can use to make payments with a digital wallet integrated into Facebook ’ s Messenger and WhatsApp applications . But let ’ s assume it does . Key to the success of any currency is ubiquity . Facebook has that ( in most parts of the world ) . Along with its enormous customer base , and wealth , it also has the backing of 27 other corporations . These include key global players in electronic payments – Mastercard , Visa and Paypal . Read more : Joined together in a Swiss-based not-for-profit entity called the , these companies are particularly interested in the prospect of billions of people using a mobile phone without ever needing a bank account . There are , tellingly , no banks in the group . The Libra ’ s utility as a payment system is underlined by its design differences to a cryptocurrency like Bitcoin . The value of Bitcoin fluctuates wildly . The Libra ’ s value will instead be stabilised . This will be done using a private sector version of a mechanism known as a “ ” . The threat to monetary policy A goal of the Libra Association is to “ move toward increasing decentralisation ” . As Hughes notes , central banks were established to deal with the problems that came with a decentralised financial system . “ After many mistakes , we have learnt that we want a central bank to act to increase or decrease the monetary supply in moments of contraction or expansion. ” To understand why decentralisation might pose a threat to the role of central banks , let ’ s recap how they exercise monetary policy . The power of a central bank comes from setting interest rates . The Reserve Bank of Australia , for example , does this through operating what is called the . Banks must deposit enough currency with the RBA to cover obligations to other banks . The RBA effectively by offering to take deposits or lend in the market at rates 25 basis points below and above its target interest rate . It also transacts in the market by buying and selling bonds and derivatives . Doing this keeps the interest rate in the market very close to the RBA ’ s target . Changes in the rate are generally reflected in interest rates on bank loans . These in turn affect economic activity and inflation . The concern is that a substantial move towards using could reduce banks ’ importance as money lenders , and therefore the role of the interbank markets . If the central bank ’ s balance sheet is smaller , its ability to influence the interest rates offered by financial institutions is theoretically weakened . But the vast bulk of loans made by banks are to consumers to buy homes and cars , and to companies to buy capital equipment . These do not seem the types of goods likely to be paid for in Libras . The central bank could also expand its balance sheet by issuing its own central bank bills or bonds . And so long as a government requires taxes to be paid in its national currency , the demand for the interbank market will never totally dry up . So at this point , even if successful , I think it ’ s an exaggeration to suggest the Libra poses a threat to the important role of central banks in keeping economies stable through monetary policy . Will the Libra project even succeed ? Other concerns , though , such as the use of cryptocurrencies , should be taken seriously . But let ’ s also take a reality check . There is no certainty the will succeed . In the 1990s and were promoted by some major banks as the payments systems that would replace cash . They never achieved critical mass . has been much hyped for more than a decade but still only accounts for a miniscule proportion of transactions ( which is a good thing given the process of creating bitcoins is so energy-intensive ) . Read more : Many other similar cryptocurrencies have come and gone . A decade ago Facebook had ambitions to establish a “ safe and secure way ” to make online payments with its . It abandoned the project after three years . So it is unsurprising that Reserve Bank of Australia economists “ of a material take-up of cryptocurrencies for retail payments in Australia in the foreseeable future ” .
Will Libra be Facebook ’ s downfall ? Is Facebook today ’ s Compuserve ? How Libra could hasten its demise June 24 , 2019 10.51pm BST University of British Columbia Author RBC Financial Group Professor of Entrepreneurship & Associate Professor , OBHR Division , University of British Columbia Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list When Mark Zuckerberg was five years old in 1989 , two dominant players in telecommunications made a big announcement . Compuserve ( the first major commercial online service provider ) and MCI Mail ( one of the first commercial e-mail service providers ) . These relays connected their centralized networks to the public , outside of their direct control . Facebook ’ s of entering the distributed trust era with Libra , a new cryptocurrency , is the modern-day equivalent . And it ’ s likely to have the same result . Private precursor to public internet Launched in 1969 , Compuserve was an innovator in shared computing . In 1979 , it launched Micronet , the . This was quickly followed in 1980 with CB Simulator , the . Compuserve quickly added a wide range of consumer information services such as weather , stock quotes and discussion forums . It tied people together globally through its its centrally owned worldwide network . By 1991 , Compuserve had more than online users . In 1995 , it was the largest online service with . It has since been called the “ ” But the big difference is that its network was private and centrally controlled . It was not an open network like the public internet . Publicizing the commercial internet Early coverage of Compuserve and MCI ’ s gateways described the relatively unknown internet as a worldwide research network of government agencies , universities and commercial firms . This started to legitimize commercial uses of the internet for the general public , but was not without its . Overall , the relays announcement helped give legitimacy and publicity to the emerging public commercial internet . It started the path to weakening the centralized power of Compuserve and MCI . At first , the cutting-edge announcement by Compuserve and MCI gave them an advantage . It also gave them the opportunity to shape some of the initial public conceptions of the public internet . , giving further legitimacy to internet commerce . But these organizations were designed in a time of centralized control . Their model of charging consumers was based on usage . Compuserve stuck with that old model and as late as 1994 they still . Power shifts The shift to more , where content was produced by people outside of the organization , was a new world . Many , including Compuserve and MCI , eventually lost power to be replaced by new organizations designed for this new content production model . In 1994 , a New York Times piece suggested “ . ” This eventually led to the growth of many modern-day platform companies such as Facebook ( created in 2003 ) and Uber ( founded in 2009 ) . Such organizations became dominant powerful companies very quickly , disrupting every major industry . Silicon Valley model The transition to the Information Age created new distributed business models . Modern platform organizations operate with a business model focused on . The Facebook platform matches advertisers with eyeballs , for example . The Uber model matches riders with drivers . Read more : The power of critical mass and the legitimacy of enabling trusted transactions are two keys to the success of platforms . And so the venture capital funding model focuses on building rapid , sustainable growth of these trusted middlemen . Much of the modern Silicon Valley success story is built around this simple logic . This evolutionary process parallels the recent distributed trust . The public internet shifted from central control to a shared infrastructure with distributed production . Now centralized trust is shifting to a shared infrastructure with distributed trust . Distributed trust technologies displace middlemen in transactions , and make us . Instead of trusting central organizations , people place their trust in the technology itself . Read more : The previous disruptors are being disrupted themselves . Facebook ’ s Libra partners ( including Uber , Ebay , Paypal , Spotify , Visa , and Mastercard ) read like a Who ’ s Who of middlemen organizations that are being threatened with disruption by distributed trust . Old dogs Organizational theory shows that when market conditions change drastically , . Old dogs have a hard time learning new tricks . So it ’ s no surprise that Libra is entering the space with a . Such models centralize decision power with a select few — the initial Libra partners . They are not truly distributed trust models . They are closer to the distributed production models so familiar to major dominant platforms of the last technological wave . On top of that , Facebook will separately offer a , Calibra , to facilitate Libra transactions . Read more : The promises an eventual relaxing of that centralized control to a “ permissionless ” model . But it offers or requirement to do so . It asks participants to “ trust us ” that a truly distributed trust model will come in the future . Legitimization History suggests Facebook ’ s introduction of Libra will ultimately help legitimize distributed trust technologies . Major players endorsing Libra adds legitimacy to distributed trust technologies . The initial actions of Compuserve and MCI Mail led to . The increased focus on distributed trust generated by Libra will too . Part of this is due to . In fact , there are already in the , and . Regulations and public discourse will help to bring further legitimacy to distributed trust models . Regulators should be cautious about biasing legislation to favour incumbents , however , and ensure an open evolution of the true capabilities of distributed trust . Evolution Such legitimacy reduces the major barriers to new business models built on a shared , distributed trust infrastructure . This creates a major opportunity for designed without the burdens of past organizational inertia . There is a good chance that Libra ’ s partners will gain short-term power with this move . Technology diffusion processes can . But those companies were not initially designed to survive in such distributed trust models , and are plagued by organizational inertia . So the creation of Libra , and the legitimacy it will give to the underlying technologies , paradoxically will ultimately speed the demise of the very same organizations . Bitcoin ’ s price , for example , even though Bitcoin itself is likely to be eventually disrupted by others . The stars of the modern , platform-based internet are likely to eventually join the ranks of Compuserve and MCI Mail . They will be replaced with the next generation of organizing designed for these new models of distributed trust — and not burdened by the inertia of the centrally controlled past . Perhaps Facebook is the Compuserve of 2019 .
A customer and vendor exchange electronic money through a mobile phone in Uganda . Facebook ’ s Libra may be quite attractive in developing countries June 25 , 2019 1.48pm BST University of North Carolina – Greensboro Author Professor of Management , University of North Carolina – Greensboro Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list has taken a lot of criticism from and – but it ’ s not meant for them . A major target market for the Libra is . From researching , and in the context of , I can see that digital payment systems are already attractive . Libra may , because Facebook has the money and technological advances that could make Libra easier than many existing methods . A huge market opportunity Most of Facebook ’ s , and the of Facebook-owned WhatsApp , live . India is WhatsApp ’ s biggest market , with . There are WhatsApp users in Brazil . In those two countries , , such as exchanging bills and receipts with customers and suppliers . Cheaper transactions WhatsApp has been , which lets users send money directly to each other ’ s bank accounts . It ’ s only available in India , where there are – and it ’ s not the only peer-to-peer funds transfer service in the country . In addition to sending each other money , people also use WhatsApp Pay for from vendors . However , WhatsApp Pay depends on the to handle the transactions . That means to let their customers use the service . Libra could be cheaper to use , and could expand WhatsApp Pay ’ s reach far beyond India . Expanding the service across many countries could prove a huge opportunity for families with members working overseas . Many people who emigrate from developing countries to more developed nations send money back home to help their families get by . In 2018 , people sent – and $ 529 billion of that money went to people in low- and middle-income nations . The fees for those services are enormous – , or 3.5 % of the total amount sent . Facebook knows that , which the financial industry calls “ remittances , ” would be a huge draw , letting emigrants , rather than paying it to middlemen . In addition , Facebook ’ s Libra is designed to be a place to hold users ’ funds , as well as allow people to exchange money . That could reduce , or even eliminate , fees for other transactions too . People who use like PayPal and Coinbase , could also connect to their Libra wallets , further expanding how useful a digital wallet could be . Easier to use There are other companies developing similar services . Humaniq , for instance , is a blockchain startup that offers its in a service . Its customers can exchange money and messages through its app . But Humaniq is a young company with more limited resources and a short track record of success and security . Facebook is much better positioned to dominate . In addition to its enormous user base , Facebook has the programming expertise to design user-friendly interfaces . For instance , WhatsApp already provides messaging in . Libra is intended to so its users can also send money back and forth just as easily as they send text messages . Libra ’ s other partners include like Visa , PayPal , Spotify and Uber , who are equally experienced at providing users with easy experiences . Providing stability , efficiency and security Cryptocurrencies , including the Libra , to consumers and businesses in economies suffering from high inflation , high interest rates and unstable currency exchange rates . For instance , the Argentinian e-commerce company . That makes sense because the Argentinian peso in the first eight months of 2018 . If a customer pays with a credit card , Avalancha – and that money may not be worth what it once was . Libra also has the potential to transform the extremely inefficient microlending industry . For instance , the person-to-person microlending site Kiva has , over the past 15 years , let 1.6 million people to more than 2 million needy entrepreneurs in developing countries . But Kiva doesn ’ t lend the money directly to these budding businesspeople . Instead , it works with local microfinance institutions , most of which charge , averaging . , no doubt hoping to make its lending even more effective by directly transferring money from donors and investors to its entrepreneurs . Cryptocurrency systems are attractive to people in developing countries because they have the . Digital payment systems in developing countries , , are . system have also been . Concerns remain Libra has the potential to bring many benefits , but only if it can address a wide range of national and international concerns , from financial regulators and consumers alike . Facebook must both at the sending end of a transaction and the receiving end . At the same time , Facebook will have to convince its customers that it can keep their financial information private . , suggests financial accounts will be linked to social media identities . alike with its violations , , of users ’ privacy . On an even wider scale , some governments – in both and – are worried Facebook might become a “ , ” a place to store money that ’ s not subject to regulations regular banks are . Others have expressed concern about the sovereignty implications of a . Facebook has a lot of work to do before Libra can live up to its potential – and there ’ s no guarantee that will happen . But it is clear that consumers and businesses in developing countries want technological help engaging in transactions and storing money .
Facebook ’ s libra has staggering potential – state control of money could end June 26 , 2019 12.14pm BST Manchester Metropolitan University Author Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The fruit of your coins . The UN 180 currencies worldwide as legal tender , all of them issued by nation states . It does not recognise cryptocurrencies like bitcoin in this way , even if communities of enthusiasts have been treating them as a means of exchange for over a decade now . Yet the latest addition to this group , , threatens to do something that no other cryptocurrencies have come close to achieving : the state monopoly over the control and issuance of money is now under serious threat . Facebook over half the world population as active monthly users : 2.2 billion on Facebook , 0.8 billion on Instagram and 0.7 billion on WhatsApp . Combined with the 1.7 billion adults worldwide have no bank accounts , a project like this is the perfect petri dish in which to create a truly global currency . The Libra Council The independent Libra Council that Facebook to oversee this new currency from Geneva will become nothing short of a quasi central bank . Consisting of 27 giant corporates plus Facebook , it will vet aspiring applicants who wish to join their ranks for a fee of US $ 10m ( £7.9m ) ; as well as manage the reserve of state currencies and short-term government bonds that will back the libra . This model is very different to the likes of bitcoin , whose exchange rate is driven purely by the supply and demand . In contrast , the Libra Council would be competing in global currency wars against other nation states . Imagine ten years from now if , say , 40 % of all US dollars are held on deposit by Facebook/the council to back the issued libra coins , which have by now become widely used across the world . We can hypothesise that US dollars might constitute a 30 % weight of libra ’ s asset-backing basket – to have a steady exchange rate for libra , the idea is to underpin it with a selection of stable and widely traded financial assets . In the likely event that the US experiences a moderate , or even severe economic crisis , Facebook/the council would need to rebalance the basket of assets to defend the value of libra . Let ’ s say they decided to revise down the US dollar weighting in their reserve to 25 % of the basket . This would involve selling huge sums of US dollars and replacing them with , say , euros , and would significantly drive down the value of the dollar . This would be a very negative market signal , encouraging other holders of dollars to dump them as well , thereby exacerbating the fall . And even before this happened , Facebook could potentially use the mere threat as leverage in negotiating with nation states on matters of regulation , taxation and so on . Facebook ’ s current revenues , it would already be 90th in the world by GDP if it was a nation state , so its power to face off in negotiations with states and trading blocs is formidable even without libra . Read more : How do nation states control a global company with unprecedented access to their citizens ’ data , its own currency , and perhaps the ability to affect their domestic politics and the strength of their currency on the global markets ? It sounds tricky to put it mildly . And by the way , it ’ s not only Facebook that is entering this space . JP Morgan has just launched a cryptocurrency for institutional customers , 13 other global investment banks are planning to follow suit with currencies in 2020 . Samsung to be looking at launching a currency for ordinary customers , while it would not be surprising if other online giants like Amazon and Google were tempted , too . The greater threat Mark Carney , governor of the Bank of England and chairman of the Financial Stability Board , in 2018 that cryptocurrencies didn ’ t pose a systemic risk to the global financial system . His assessment might have been based on their current footprint rather than their potential . In fact , the blockchain technology that underpins new currencies like libra has astonishing potential . The ability to significantly move exchange rates is only part of it : if people buy and sell with these currencies , save with them , trade with them , demand for state currencies and bonds could plunge . This would undermine the ability of central banks and governments to buy and sell these assets to set national interest rates . It would emasculate this vital means of managing our economies , leaving only fiscal levers like taxing and spending at the disposal of states . What then ? Of course , such a seismic shift in our control of the use of money would first require these new currencies to be widely adopted . Yet the genie has been out of the bottle since the arrival of cryptocurrencies – it will be very difficult to stop it now . If this space comes to be dominated by big listed companies like Facebook and JP Morgan , it is at least arguably preferable to alternatives like bitcoin which are almost unfettered in having no geographic or tax domicile and being pseudo-anonymous in nature . A currency like libra also has the potential to reduce consumer transaction speeds , improve transparency and allow users to store their wealth digitally using a “ trusted ” consortium of founding institutions . And when it comes to future geopolitical shocks like Brexit , consumers will be able to shield themselves more easily by reducing their exposure to , say , the British pound by holding their wealth in libra or whatever instead . Arguably we are talking about a superior type of money that is better aligned to a younger generation that is comfortable with such new forms of money . Notwithstanding , we need to come to terms with the size of this potential change and its ramifications : Facebook ’ s impact on our societies has been profound over the previous two decades , and libra may well eclipse that accomplishment . Facebook ’ s of “ move fast and break things ” seems entirely consistent with the strategy for this currency . The American futurist famously “ once a technology rolls over you , if you ’ re not part of the steamroller , you ’ re part of the road ” . Well , nation states appear not to have been invited to get on board this particular steamroller . That leaves a lot of vulnerable road – watch closely to see what they try and do about it in the months ahead .
Libra could become more successful than other cryptocurrencies because it has the backing of multiple large international corporations . The lowdown on Libra : what consumers need to know about Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency June 27 , 2019 6.24am BST Griffith University Author Associate Professor , Griffith University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cryptocurrencies have become a global phenomenon in the past few years . Now Facebook is launching it ’ s own cryptocurrency , in association with Visa , MasterCard , Uber and others . The stated aim of is to “ enable a simple global currency and financial infrastructure that empowers billions of people ” . The announcement has sparked fears that Libra could be , warnings to be , and of claims that it will help developing countries . But let ’ s go back to the basics and look at what Libra is , how it compares to other cryptocurrencies and whether you should be concerned about using it when it eventually arrives . Read more : What is a cryptocurrency ? Currency is a system of money that is commonly used in exchange for goods and services and , as a result , holds value . Cryptocurrencies are digital currencies that are secured using cryptography . The more popular recent cryptocurrencies are based on blockchain technology which uses a cryptographic structure that is difficult to change . One of the key properties of this structure is a distributed ledger that keeps account of financial transactions , which anyone can access . What is Libra ? Libra is a new currency that is being proposed by Facebook . It ’ s considered a cryptocurrency because cryptography will be used to help protect the value of the currency from tampering – such as double spending – and to protect the payment process . Libra has the potential to become successful because of the backing from the , which is made up of large international corporations such as Facebook , Uber and Vodafone . MasterCard and Visa have also thrown their hats in the ring , but no traditional banks are on the list . What ’ s different about Libra compared with other cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin ? Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum are quite egalitarian in nature . That ’ s because there is no single authority that verifies transactions between parties , so anyone could potentially do it . To authorise a Bitcoin transaction you would have to prove that you have done the work , known as a “ ” . For Bitcoin , the proof of work is to solve a mathematical puzzle . People who successfully solve the puzzle ( proving they have done some work ) , can add transactions to the blockchain distributed ledger and are rewarded with Bitcoins . The process is known as mining . The good thing about this is that it reduces fraud . Since anyone can potentially mine Bitcoins , it ’ s harder to collude as you wouldn ’ t know who the next person to mine a coin would be . And it ’ s simple to verify that the person is authorised because anyone can check that the puzzle has been solved correctly . Based on the , it sounds like the difference with Libra is that it will verify transactions using a consensus system known as “ ” , or a variation of this method . Under this system , transactions would be authorised by a group of people who have a stake or ownership in the currency . This makes it easier to predict who the next person to authorise a transaction might be ( since there are a relatively small number of authorising group members ) , and then collude to launder funds without other group members knowing . It the criteria to become a founding member of the Libra Association is to contribute a minimum of US $ 10 million entrance fee , have a large amount of money in the bank and be able to influence a large number of people . Read more : What are banks and regulators worried about ? Cryptocurrencies affect governments and tax systems since they have little to no transaction costs when money is transferred across borders . So while the low transaction costs would be good for everyday users , the advent of a new cryptocurrency with a potentially very large user base has governments and traditional banks very concerned . While Libra is open source – meaning the source code is available for all to view , use and modify – it ’ s the members of the association who will be overseeing the currency . Libra could herald a shift away from traditional government taxes and banking fees to a new international monetary system controlled by corporate entities like Facebook and Uber . That ’ s a concern because of the lack of oversight from regulatory bodies . What should everyday people expect from Libra ? The backing of software giants means it ’ s likely that the user interface for Libra coins would be smooth and simple to use . Low transaction costs would benefit users and the Libra Association promises to control the value of the currency so that it does not fluctuate as much as other cryptocurrencies . It ’ s unclear how they plan to do this . But value stability would be a great advantage in times of uncertainty . What are the risks ? The everyday consumer probably wouldn ’ t know the difference between the “ proof of work ” and the “ proof of stake ” mechanisms . But since Facebook has a large database of users that are known to use Libra , it may be able to link Libra transactions to individuals . This could be a privacy concern . ( Bitcoin transactions are anonymous because account numbers used in Bitcoin transactions are not linked to an individual ’ s identity . ) Recent cybersecurity have contributed to a growing awareness of the vulnerabilities of IT systems . As with all software , the Libra implementation and management could be vulnerable to attack , which in turn could mean users could lose their money . But that is a risk that all cryptocurrency users face , whether they are aware of it or not . Read more : What steps could consumers take to protect themselves ? No matter what cryptocurrency you choose to use , your funds are still accessible through the same interfaces : a web page or a mobile app . And the way you control access to your personal funds is by authenticating with a password . Make sure you keep your password safe by making sure it is complicated and hard to guess . Look for applications that allow you to use two-factor authentication and make sure it ’ s turned on . Libra is yet to prove its claims of making financial transactions safe and convenient . Only time will tell if its uptake will become widespread following its expected launch next year .
With no physical form , the cryptocurrency Bitcoin is difficult to analyse and its trading patterns challenging to discern . The answer to forecasting Bitcoin may lie in artificial intelligence July 1 , 2019 1.57pm BST University of Guelph Author Professor , Finance , University of Guelph Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list As it held in late 2017 when it nearly reached US $ 20,000 in value , investors are still questioning how to predict such a volatile currency . As a cryptocurrency , there is no physical form that gives Bitcoin value , so it is impossible to perform traditional fundamental analysis of the currency . Consequently , many investors track the so-called ( geometric patterns constructed from historical prices and trading volumes ) in order to understand and predict Bitcoin ’ s future movement . Some researchers have found success with . But these sometimes have hundreds of variables ( or predictors ) and it is difficult to determine key factors or test the replicability of such approaches . It ’ s also hard to understand what factors really drive Bitcoin fluctuations on the market . For over 20 years , I have been researching . At the Lang School of Business and Economics at the University of Guelph , my co-author and former graduate student Robert Adcock and I to test the predictability of Bitcoin prices . Predicting fluctuations We used technical indicators called moving averages as predictors . Moving averages are constructed by averaging prices over a period of time ( e.g . 50 or 200 days ) and plotting them as a line along with the prices . The rationale for using moving averages is that if the price of Bitcoin today becomes greater or lower than the average price over the past 50 or 200 days , traders could expect the emergence of an upward or downward trend . If Bitcoin is unpredictable , then our model is not expected to beat the model — essentially , it is no better than guessing . However , our regarding Bitcoin ’ s predictability over time and during bouts of unusual volatility . Artificial intelligence forecasts Using daily observations from 2011-2018 , we created an ANN with three predictors : returns , 50-day buy-sell signal and 200-day buy-sell signal . We also tested an ANN model that included the to see if stock market volatility had any noticeable effect on Bitcoin movements . The as based on the . Higher values of VIX indicate that the market will make a large swing . Artificial neural networks operate in a similar way to the basic functioning of the human brain . Our model takes predictors , or inputs , and outputs ( the daily price change of Bitcoin ) and attempts to learn a pattern from all the data . It continues to test its patterns until it reaches an optimal point where further testing is redundant . These advanced models form the backbone of many . By combining Bitcoin technical analysis and neural networks , we hoped that the ANN would find a pattern among the data that allowed us to more accurately predict future returns . Non-traditional investors Our ANN model did indeed succeed in reducing the prediction error of the random walk by about five to 10 per cent over the full observation period . These forecast improvements are statistically significant , indicating that predicting Bitcoin prices on a daily basis is no longer guesswork . Our results show that Bitcoin is unaffected by how the stock market changes , which suggests that traditional market investors and investors in Bitcoin are two distinct groups . We also separated the data into four subsamples of similar time frames to further zoom in on market inefficiencies . Our ANN ’ s predictive performance improved further within these subsamples . One subsample , running from October 2014 to June 2016 , provided the best results of the study . The isolated 200-day signal model outperformed the random walk by 43.55 per cent . We noted that this subsample had low volatility compared to the other three subsamples and was the steadiest period of data we observed . In essence , greater market volatility makes learning data patterns and training of the ANN model more difficult . Along with price accuracy , we also observed how often our ANN models correctly predicted whether prices would increase or decrease . Our main comprehensive model over the entire 2011-2018 period had nearly 63 per cent prediction accuracy . Put differently , Bitcoin trading with our model would be on average more profitable than placing random buy and sell orders that have a 50 per cent chance of making a profit . Speculation and predictive bubbles Compared to other predictive models , our ANN provided the most accurate and reliable predictive method for Bitcoin . We concluded that the historical evolution of daily Bitcoin prices followed predictive trends ( or bubbles ) that potentially arise from the speculative nature of cryptocurrency trading . Read more : We believe that the future of forecasting Bitcoin — and perhaps investing in general — lies in the abilities of artificial intelligence and artificial neural networks . While people may argue over the merits of Bitcoin as a currency , we can at least appreciate it as a fascinating — and now easier-to-predict — commodity .
Libra , Iran and the potential end of cryptocurrencies as we know them July 1 , 2019 2.24pm BST The Open University Author Senior Lecturer in Law , The Open University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency , libra , is being heralded as the moment that cryptocurrencies and blockchain , the technology that supports them , . A notable in the run up to the libra announcement on June 18 , and since , suggests a market directly responding to this possibility and bolstered by it . Of course , the price of bitcoin is known to rise and fall sharply . Yet there is no doubt that having one of the world ’ s largest and most influential corporations throwing its weight behind the technology will calm nerves and build confidence . More importantly , it gives legitimacy to the idea that cryptocurrencies and blockchain are here to stay . And , as I have argued in my research , must be , not least by . Read more : In the same moment the world is introduced to libra , tensions between the United States and Iran continue to grow , with increasing US sanctions against Iran . The two are not directly connected , but libra ( or other cryptocurrencies ) could offer Iran a route round its sanctions . This , of course , is not something Facebook intends – but Iran ’ s interest in cryptocurrencies could have a serious influence on libra ’ s future . A troubled past In their contemporary forms , bitcoin and blockchain have been around for . In this time cryptocurrencies have proliferated wildly . According to the cryptocurrency platform , , there are now at least 2,248 different kinds of tokens . Many of these are actively and enthusiastically exchanged and traded by a growing number of people . The recent history of cryptocurrencies , and bitcoin specifically , has not been all that positive . Famously , in 2013 , the following an FBI investigation . The site ’ s founder , Ross Ulbricht , was imprisoned for life . Silk Road users relied heavily on bitcoin to ensure anonymity , and the libertarian ethos underpinning bitcoin appeared to fit well with Silk Road ’ s rejection and evasion of authority and regulation . What was so attractive for many about Silk Road , bitcoin and aspects of blockchain technology in general , was the fact that together they enable people to side step the usual legal constraints and regulations that apply online and offline when it comes to financial transactions . The anonymity bitcoin offers enables people to buy and sell without detection . Read more : Silk Road offered a form of freedom to its users they were unlikely to have enjoyed previously . But this , of course , put it at loggerheads with laws and regulations in most countries and jurisdictions . While the Silk Road marketplace is now gone , cryptocurrency and blockchain are attracting more interest than ever before . At the same time governmental oversight of the technology . Although things may be about to change . Crypto-Iran Iran has long recognised the benefits of around crypto-assets and blockchain technology to counter US sanctions . This has included attempts to develop its own . That Iran might use Facebook ’ s new cryptocurrency libra to dance around US sanctions , a la Silk Road , is entirely speculative . Given Facebook ’ s contentious track record on the management of in recent years , and the fact that it is yet to convince of the legitimacy of its project , Iran , let alone billions of Facebook users , may not even get a chance to use libra at all . Read more : However , the potential for Iran to use libra raises serious questions about the level of control that should be demanded over cryptocurrency use . Robust state or corporate oversight of the technology ( or perhaps a troubling blend of the two , ) , could kill , once and for all , the that blockchains and cryptocurrencies have long encapsulated . Facebook may well find stiff opposition to libra based on the vagaries of financial regulations . But it could well face stiffer opposition both politically , from governments who don ’ t want their foreign policies undermined – and commercially , from users not getting the empowering financial infrastructure , but , instead , a heavily controlled one . Iran ’ s interest in cryptocurrencies encapsulates how , in today ’ s world , the empowerment and transparency that many advocates of cryptocurrencies and blockchains like to think is only a piece of code away is little more than a . Something always seems to spoil the party . Blockchain has been celebrated as a technology to circumvent authority and regulation – the role of bitcoin in Silk Road and its continued is evidence of this . Put simply , Iran is just another example of wanting to avoid the authorities . But this could be a step too far for authorities . And this could have a serious effect on all cryptocurrencies – not just Facebook ’ s libra . If the perception in the US and elsewhere is that Iran intends to use the technology , this could require a significant rethink regarding the future of cryptocurrencies and blockchains . It won ’ t mean the end of them , certainly not . But if this is the moment the technology truly became mainstream , then it could equally be the moment it finally yields to control and regulation – and the end of founder “ ” . Libra could be a solution , but for some it may also look a lot like a problem .
Calibra has little to do with the ideals behind blockchain . The digital wallet is more like a traditional bank account . All the hype around Libra is a red herring . Facebook ’ s main game is Calibra July 8 , 2019 5.49am BST Australian National University Author Blockchain Researcher & Lecturer Data Analysis , Australian National University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Amid the hype around Facebook ’ s plan to launch its own cryptocurrency , Libra , there ’ s one big question . How is the company going to profit from it ? The project relies on developing blockchain technology . But blockchain ’ s whole raison d'être is to challenge the way corporate capitalism and businesses like Facebook make money . Facebook has also established , with several dozen equally capitalistic partners , the , a nonprofit organisation based in Switzerland , to spearhead the venture . Read more : After years of copping criticism for questionable business practices , has Facebook decided to take an altruistic turn ? Probably not . It ’ s more likely that blockchain , and even Libra , is a means to a end ; it ’ s about Facebook wanting to be not only the world ’ s biggest social media platform but also the globe ’ s go-to marketplace , putting Amazon , eBay , Apple and Google in the shade . To appreciate why this suggestion isn ’ t also hyperbole , we need to talk not so much about Libra but its companion technology , the “ custodial wallet ” called Calibra . Blockchain , but not blockchain First , let ’ s do a quick recap of some fundamentals . In 2008 , a person or group calling themselves Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a method for transacting over the internet without a trusted third party such as a bank . It uses a distributed ledger known as a blockchain and cryptography to maintain a tamper-proof record of ownership of electronic cash – hence the term cryptocurrency . Blockchain ’ s core innovation is to do away with the need for trusted entities like banks . So how do people safely send or receive cryptocurrency ? Well , they can use a “ cryptocurrency wallet ” . A cryptocurrency balance is recorded against a blockchain address . Proving ownership depends on a secret code ( or “ private key ” ) known only to the owner . The “ wallet ” is essentially software that allows people to manage their private keys and authorise transactions . Facebook has other ideas for its cryptocurrency . The Libra Association says it wants to “ ” . Tapping addresses and secret codes into a wallet interface every time wouldn ’ t be that easy . These codes can be long – up to 64 characters , compared to 16 for a credit card . So Facebook will instead provide a “ custodial wallet ” – Calibra . It will be the custodian of your cryptocurrency , much like a bank is custodian of your money , and thus manage your wallet for you . Facebook can certainly argue that this makes it much easier to use Libra – and it wants to make Libra easy to use so you can buy items through Facebook and its other platforms , such as Whatsapp and Instagram . But this aspect has little to do with the original ideals behind blockchain . It makes Calibra more like a bank , with a record of your electronic payments . It will know everything you buy or sell through its wallet ; and it “ Calibra customer data with managed vendors and service providers — including Facebook ” . How Facebook monetises data Why is this important ? Because Facebook is in the business of gathering your personal data . It now uses this information to make from selling advertising – US $ 14.9 billion in the first quarter of 2019 alone . Its value as an advertising delivery mechanism comes not just from its sheer number of users ( 1.56 billion daily users , and 2.37 billion monthly users ) but from what it knows about them . This goes way beyond basic personal details like your birthdate . Almost everything about Facebook is designed to get you to reveal personal information . You do this through what you post and the posts you like or respond to . You do this even when not directly using Facebook . Lots of online stores report back to Facebook when you visit them , for example . Read more : Identifying key personality traits can be used to predict purchasing behaviour – or political preference , as demonstrated in the Cambridge Analytica controversy . The British-based political consultancy bragged it effectively swung the US 2016 election to Donald Trump by using Facebook to harvest user data and then directing customised political messages to users ’ newsfeeds . Read more : While there is some scepticism about Cambridge Analytica ’ s electoral impact , it is generally agreed the process of “ micro-targeting ” can be very effective for marketers . So the more information Facebook has about you , the more money it can potentially make by influencing you . Becoming bigger than Amazon There ’ s more . Facebook ’ s value as an advertising powerhouse has made its founder , Mark Zuckerberg , extremely wealthy – worth an estimated US $ 73 billion . But that ’ s less than half of Amazon ’ s founder , Jeff Bezos , who ’ s worth US $ 158 billion . Both companies are in the business of helping merchants sell products . But Amazon ’ s position as an online marketplace is more lucrative than Facebook ’ s role as a shop window . Amazon can take a cut from every sale . Its retail business makes up about of its value , which is greater than Facebook ’ s total value of . What if Facebook could be both the shop window and the cash register ? What if it no longer just introduced users to merchants but also became the digital marketplace supporting those merchants ? What if it could collect not just social data but also buyer history data ? This is what Libra , and more critically , Calibra , could mean for Facebook . Libra ’ s an important part of this picture . But it ’ s Calibra that could deliver the data Facebook needs to become possibly the most valuable , and powerful , online company in the world .
Facebook ’ s Libra : it ’ s not the ‘ crypto ’ that ’ s the issue , it ’ s the organisation behind it August 6 , 2019 2.44pm BST University of California , Irvine University of Bristol Authors Professor of Anthropology and Law , University of California , Irvine Lecturer in Management , University of Bristol Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The founding partners of the Libra Association . In all the hype that has surrounded its Libra currency , Facebook has been able to distract attention away from an important issue . Libra is being hyped as Facebook ’ s bitcoin but it ’ s really a proposal for a global payments system . And that system will be controlled by a small and exclusive club of private firms . Since it was announced in June , politicians and regulators have attacked Libra , citing . Libra is not a cryptocurrency – at least , not as they have been put into practice so far , where a distributed , decentralised community participates in transaction verification . Libra is essentially a prepaid digital token , backed one-to-one with a basket of reserve currencies . It is “ minted ” when people put up state-issued currencies to buy it . Read more : What ’ s important here is not the technological innovation . Facebook is proposing , in Libra , a new form of organisation . We already have payment systems controlled by private companies – Visa , MasterCard , Venmo or PayPal , which provide the infrastructure or “ rails ” for transferring value – and Libra might turn into another such rail . But its promoters have . Based on our research on the , we see similarities between Libra and Visa . But it ’ s the differences with the Visa network that raise the biggest warning flags . Learning from Visa Libra will be controlled and maintained by the , a membership-based group . Libra ’ s developers have voiced a commitment to letting anyone become a member of the association , including users like you and me . The trumpets the importance of decentralisation . But it also admits that , “ as of today we do not believe that there is a proven solution that can deliver the scale , stability , and security needed to support billions of people and transactions across the globe ” through a truly open , decentralised system . We believe Libra ’ s founders got the idea from . Hock was heralded as a visionary in his day , like Steve Jobs or Mark Zuckerberg today . He realised that the problem facing payments between banks was not technological , but organisational . When setting up Visa , it was important for Hock that Visa would not be owned by self-interested shareholders . Instead , it was the users , banks and credit unions , who “ owned ” Visa as a cooperative membership organisation . Ownership here did not entail the right to sell shares , but an irrevocable right of participation – to jointly decide on the rules of the game and Visa ’ s future . The incentive was to create a malleable but durable payment infrastructure from which all members would benefit in the long term . To work , everyone had to give something up – including their own branding on credit cards , subordinating their marks to Visa . This was a really big deal . But Hock convinced the network ’ s initial members that the payoff would come from the new market in payment services they would create . He was right . For most of its existence , until it went public in 2016 , Visa was an anomalous creature : a for-profit , non-stock corporation based on the principle of self-organisation , embodying both chaos and order . Hock even coined a term for it : . Libra envisions a similar collaborative organisation among the founding members of its Libra Association . But it turns Hock ’ s principles upside down . The Libra Association is all about ownership and control by its members as a club . Big barriers to entry And the Libra Association is a club with very high barriers to entry . An entity has to invest at least US $ 10m in Libra or have more than US $ 1 billion in market value , among other criteria . The initial tilts toward groups that have shown strong opposition to government interference and oversight . Tellingly , there are no regulated financial entities – like banks and fund managers – in the mix . The membership represents a self-selecting crème de la crème of global tech and . Association membership guarantees a share of future profits proportionate to a member ’ s stake in the system . Unlike Visa , members do not compete with one another for market share . Instead , they will passively collect rent from interest made on investing in the Libra reserve basket . Plus , profits are not shared with users , and no interest is paid on the balance held by individuals . Read more : Being a club member also affords the right to vote – again , a lot like Visa . But , unlike Visa , Libra gives voting right power based on investment level , not participation . This is not democratic ; it is a plutocracy , where the wealthiest rule . And , as profits are linked solely to interest on the association ’ s reserve funds , those managing it may well become riskier and more speculative over time . Libra ’ s white paper outlines an organisation that could become a decentralised , participatory system like Hock envisioned Visa would become . But Libra , if it is successful , will likely become an undemocratic behemoth . Alarm bells ring about a global currency ’ s de facto governance by a private , exclusive club serving the purposes of its investor-owners , not the public good . Governments have long been suspicious of private currencies for good reasons , and Libra is no exception . We must not be distracted by its proposed technical complexity , and instead , focus on how this technology is organised , put to work , and how its rewards are distributed . The good news is that Facebook ’ s play for money may at last prompt politicians to regulate tech giants to curb their impact on and influence over society .
Recent revelations about the lack of privacy protections in place at the companies involved in Facebook ’ s new Libra crytocurrency raise concerns about how much trust users can place in Libra . Buyer beware : How Libra differs from Bitcoin September 19 , 2019 11.13pm BST University of Calgary Author Associate Professor , University of Calgary Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook , the largest social network in the world , stunned the world earlier this year with . The launch has raised questions about the difference between Libra and existing cryptocurrencies , as well as the implications of private companies competing with sovereign countries in issuing currencies . Unlike , which has neither an owner nor a controlling body , Libra will be governed by a Swiss foundation comprised of several members that are well-established brands , including Uber , Visa and PayPal . Read more : Libra operates within a much more controlled environment relative to many other cryptos like Bitcoin . It also doesn ’ t Instead , the book-keeping of Libra transactions is bestowed upon a set of trusted computing nodes controlled by the members of the Libra foundation . In contrast , Bitcoin is a free-for-all where anybody can join the group of computers that verify transactions . This difference in governance structure has wide-ranging implications for the economic gains and possible risks society faces from a possible widespread adoption of new currencies like Libra . How to grow ? A fundamental issue most fintech companies face today is scaleability . The Visa network can authorize up to , while Bitcoin typically processes a few hundred thousand a day . Technically , it ’ s possible to expand the Bitcoin network to a commercially viable scale , but due to the lack of a governing body , several attempts to increase capacity have ended up in endless debates , fights within the community and different camps going their own ways . It ’ s resulted in the creation of offspring currencies such as and . Libra overcomes these struggles by a well-defined governance structure where necessary technical adaptations can be efficiently decided upon in an organized manner . But Libra decision-makers may be tempted to put their own best interests ahead of the consumers ’ benefit . Recent revelations about the lack of privacy protections in place at the companies on Libra ’ s foundation raise concerns about how much trust users can place in Libra when they ’ re deciding whether to open up their financial transactions to the big internet companies on Libra ’ s board . Intimate knowledge of people ’ s purchases , wealth and shopping behaviour has incredible value for advertising and resale to other companies . It will be up to the consortium members to credibly convince the public that they will refrain from monetizing this huge wealth of data that they sit upon . Guard against fraud In our traditional financial system , laws and regulators watch over privacy as well as access to the financial system . Laws not only provide privacy protections , they also guard against fraud and ensure that citizens can participate on a level playing field . Rules are created in a democratic process . Banks in western countries can not easily ban citizens from basic financial services , which are important to join the workforce and get established in society . But currencies issued by private companies do not face the same scrutiny . What if Facebook decides you can not have Libra because you posted a critical article on the internet ? Your legal options would be limited . Bitcoin ’ s chaotic governance structure has an advantage here . Without a governing body , there is nobody who can lock anybody else out of the system . While this approach ensures equal access , however , it also invites criminals to use Bitcoin for illicit purposes . Centuries ago , promissory notes and were brought to Europe by Marco Polo as an early banking service that allowed merchants to travel without large sums of money due to fear they ’ d be robbed . Banks offered safekeeping for money , allowing the merchant to store the funds and withdraw them whenever and wherever needed . Today , banks still spend billions of dollars on security to protect their clients ’ savings . Many credit-card companies provide protection against fraudulent transactions . No such protections exist for cryptocurrencies . No recourse is possible should a hacker gain access to your wallet or if your crypto becomes worthless . With cryptocurrencies , users must once again worry about safekeeping . Deposit insurance Often under-appreciated , but of great importance , is government-provided that provides a second layer of security , protecting depositors against the default of the bank . Unlike Bitcoin , where prices fluctuate dramatically within a few days , Libra ’ s value is tied to a basket of international currencies . As users buy Libra with fiat currency , including Canadian dollars , the Libra foundation will take these dollars and invest them in safe securities . Because Libra is backed with real and stable financial assets , the value of Libra will then also be stable . While this approach sounds great at a first glance , several problems exist that have plagued banking for centuries . Temptations will arise to invest some of the money in riskier securities for a higher return . What if people , for some reason or another , doubt that the assets are there or think that the assets lost value ? Long lines of depositors wanting to withdraw their funds from a bank that they rightfully or wrongfully believe to be troubled have been observed ever since the inception of banks . Such bank runs are often self-fulfilling , and Libra is not immune to this problem . When users want to cash out , Libra would have to sell their assets at a large scale , causing the price of these very assets to fall and hence end up with insufficient funds to pay all investors . As users realize what is happening , more will want to cash out , speeding up the vicious circle . Would any government come to the rescue ? Unlike with banks , it ’ s unclear how possible losses will be covered and how they might be shared among users . Some U.S. money market funds that are in a similar business — investing client ’ s money in safe short-term assets — found themselves in similar trouble in the and were bailed out by the government . With Libra , it ’ s unclear which government would come to the rescue , if any . All the money that users will put into Libra will be missed in the traditional banking system , where banks can put deposits to good use by providing loans to productive companies that generate value and employment . The economic consequences therefore could be far-reaching . The foundation for Libra ’ s model and possible success is the banking sector ’ s shortcomings and inefficiencies . While Libra might not offer many advantages to users in Western countries , it will open access to financial services for millions of people around the world without bank accounts . Cross-border payments are in the current system ridiculously expensive and slow . Traditional banking often seems bureaucratic and technologically outdated . All these issues could be fixed by banks , but it will take outside pressure of new fintech startups to get it done . [ Deep knowledge , daily . . ]
Facebook ’ s Libra cryptocurrency can still take off and revolutionise money October 18 , 2019 1.12pm BST Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Facebook ’ s Libra cryptocurrency has suffered a few setbacks recently . As well as facing , seven of its 28 founding members have – including high profile firms PayPal , Visa , Mastercard , eBay and Stripe . It leaves 21 companies in the Libra Association , the organisation . But Facebook is big enough to launch Libra on its own , so why are these members even needed ? After all , it is Facebook ’ s network of 1.59 billion daily active users that form the foundation of its business case to issue a non-sovereign currency . Why share the spoils ? The answer may be twofold . First , by having a council of members this enables Facebook to claim decentralisation status – a key tenet of any cryptocurrency . It ’ s a far cry from the fully decentralised alternatives of bitcoin et al. , but certainly not centralised , so a valid claim . Second , and perhaps primarily , by having a group of high-profile businesses as Libra members it goes some way towards sugarcoating this disruption in the eyes of the world ’ s regulators , in readiness for the inevitable pushback . Many of the departing members – most being payments firms – stood to lose much of their core business if Libra becomes successful . So , in the face of the project facing additional scrutiny , Libra quickly became a net negative prospect for them and a respectful early withdrawal is entirely rational . But their places are likely to soon be taken up by other prospective members waiting in the wings . There are many companies that will want to capitalise on what could be a revolutionary global money system . Total membership is likely to be expanded as a show of strength . Ben Maurer , Facebook ’ s blockchain technology lead , that , “ over time , [ Libra ] is designed to transition the node membership from these founding members , who have a stake in the creation of the ecosystem , to people who hold Libra and have a stake in the ecosystem as a whole ” . Read more : Facebook has already announced that some . So turning up the dial of decentralisation is the intended objective – publicly , at least . This will help assuage the concerns of regulators that Facebook holds too much power over the new cryptocurrency . The fight is on The fight . What is at stake is the ability to extract value from the minting of new currency , . The stakes couldn ’ t be higher . The Bank of International Settlements ( the bank for central banks ) estimates that total global money is approximately US $ 5 trillion , while the CIA put that figure closer to US $ 80 trillion in 2017 , if . In comparison , the market capitalisation of all cryptocurrencies at the time of writing , some 372 times smaller than this latter estimate of total money . Facebook has the reach and the technology to make its cryptocurrency mainstream , but nation states have the regulatory power of veto to retain their monopolistic hold over monetary policy . Presently , their strategy is to spook any potential Libra partners to abandon the project . For example , US senators Sherrod Brown and Brian Schatz to the CEOs of Visa , Mastercard and Stripe saying any Libra members should expect a higher level of scrutiny not just of this project but also of their core business , too . Read more : But this pressure will only work with some companies – particularly more traditional financial firms that will ultimately lose out to Libra . The goals of the Libra project are big . If Facebook wanted to simply make some extra profits , it could have issued a voucher system , akin to a supermarket reward scheme . See Facebook ’ s previous attempt at issuing Facebook Credits . This would probably have avoided the regulatory scrutiny it has received with the Libra project and would be well-placed to take off . If Facebook simply charged users for tokens used to play games or purchase content within its applications , then regulators may have been less interested . After all , what is the real difference between purchasing Facebook credit with domestic currency to , say , purchasing credit from Vodafone to top up a prepay phone ? But the Libra project is more than this . Its aim is not to create a voucher system for internal use – it is not even to create a rival to a national currency – it is to create a global currency more similar to the euro than the US dollar , to service the under-banked and unbanked as well as threaten the dominance of existing fiat currencies in established markets . The Libra Association provides this possibility because it gives the project clout and legitimacy in front of regulators . It may even be that the financial regulators will in time feel a missed opportunity in not supporting the Libra project further . Cryptocurrencies , and corporate cryptocurrencies especially , continue to evolve and innovate . A challenger currency like Libra , with a transparent operating structure , the involvement of traditional financial firms and a recognisable , if currently bespoke monetary mechanism , could soon be seen as the lesser of forthcoming monetary evils in the form of truly decentralised globally relevant cryptocurrencies . If that is the case , expect a renewed clamour for a seat at the Libra Association table .
Major players in global electronic payments are shying away from Libra , spooked by the scrutiny Facebook ’ s operations are attracting from regulators around the world . Libra isn ’ t dead yet – the killer blow will come from governments issuing their own digital currencies October 25 , 2019 5.26am BST UNSW Author Associate Professor of Finance , Scientia Fellow , UNSW Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Barely six months after Facebook announced its own digital currency , a plan heralded as the beginning of the end for central banks and government controls over the money supply , the whole thing is looking like a house of cards . The project , named Libra , was taken seriously in part because it had the support of major players in global electronic payments , including Visa , Mastercard , Paypal and Stripe . But now they are dropping like flies . Two weeks ago pulled out , followed by , as well as eBay , Mercado Pago ( Latin America ’ s most popular e-commerce platform ) and Booking Holdings ( owner of travel booking websites including booking.com ) . They appear to be spooked by the scrutiny Facebook ’ s operations are attracting from regulators around the world . Backlash European leaders are threatening to do all they can to thwart the Libra plan . France ’ s minister for the economy , Bruno Le Maire , said his government would not allow a private company “ ” and would join with Italy and Germany “ to show clearly that Libra is unwelcome in Europe ” . Does it mean Libra is dead on arrival ? Not necessarily . The companies backing away from it might change tack again . Visa , for example , has said . Others have signalled the same . What it does means is that governments wanting to mitigate the threat from platforms such as Libra are probably going to have to do more . The stage is set for central banks seeking to pull the rug from under Libra by issuing their own digital currencies . What ’ s got governments worried Right now , unless you use a cryptocurrency like Bitcoin , any transaction you make involves a central-bank-issued currency . It doesn ’ t matter if you never touch cash . Even if you pay for everything electronically , it involves technical transfers of government-backed cash , overseen by banks . Libra ’ s plan would have made it possible to buy ( and sell ) things without ever using a national currency . Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies showed this was possible , but they lacked the stability of government-backed currencies – their value fluctuated enormously . Read more : Libra promised to overcome that by being a “ stablecoin ” . It ’ d be pretty steady . That ’ s what made people take notice of it , and made governments concerned . If it caught on , governments could lose control of money . They might lose revenue from consumption taxes . They ’ d find it harder to fight crime . Their best defence is getting in first It ’ s why the two global agencies , the and the , have called digital currencies like Libra a major threat to anti money laundering efforts and financial stability . The initial enthusiasm for Libra , both from key players in the electronic transactions and the public , shows there is demand for something that cuts out the middlemen . If Libra fails , that threat won ’ t vanish . It will simply be postponed . So governments are now considering developing their own central bank issued digital currencies . In the United States two members of the US House of Representatives ( one a Republican , the other a Democrat ) have written to Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell : We are concerned that the primacy of the US Dollar could be in long-term jeopardy from wide adoption of digital fiat [ government created ] currencies . Internationally , the Bank for International Settlements conducted a study that found that over 40 countries around the world have currently developed or are looking into developing a digital currency . How would a central bank-issued digital currency differ from the electronic money we use now every time we transfer something from one bank to another ? It would be issued directly to the public and would not be linked to paper money at all . Transactions with it would not need to involve a bank . But the supply of it would be in the hands of governments . They ’ d get in first .
Gaining currency ? More than 1,000 cryptocurrencies have already failed – here ’ s what will affect successes in future November 21 , 2019 1.47pm GMT Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Many cryptocurrencies have been launched in the past few years , often to great fanfare and celebration , only to fade and fail as the public and investors shun them . Coinopsy , which tracks such failures , there are some 1,085 dead coins at the time of writing . That ’ s a substantial number , the approximately 3,000 still in existence , and senior industry figures many of those to fail , too . Why do so many of these projects unravel ? You expect many initiatives to come and go in a fledgling market , of course – the 1990s is the perfect example . But at the same time , cryptocurrency developers have traditionally spent too little time designing the business-use case for their coins and tokens , then only realising after the launch that their idea is yesterday ’ s news . Time and again , we see launches that copy a previously successful coin – “ coin x is the new Bitcoin ” , for example . Yet the market already has Bitcoin , and it continues to be in demand – as evidenced by the 18 millionth Bitcoin only last month . We tend to overlook this problem with developers , even while we rightly criticise regulators for not being able to keep up with the fast evolution of the crypto market – despite efforts such as by US regulator the SEC , which was a fake new coin offering to teach investors about the risks of putting money into crypto . No doubt these kinds of developer errors will continue . Here are several other themes that we think will have a bearing on future crypto failures : 1 . Big Finance has arrived Eleven years ago , the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto quietly revolutionised money with the release of his or her now famous that outlined Bitcoin . In the early years after this vision took off , many of those who launched altcoins and tokens were small teams of developers and leftfield entrepreneurs . They had a clear mission to bring the world of traditional finance and central banks to its knees with decentralised units of exchange that were beyond anyone ’ s control . A few years on , these bank killers have largely been assimilated by the big financial institutions they once sought to challenge . Wall Street is taking of the crypto action , professionalising trading with the likes of derivatives and futures products . We may now be entering a phase where only large institutions will be able to generate profit from cryptocurrency design . It seems increasingly likely that the next revolutionary white paper will be generated by a global multi-billion-dollar firm – an ironic full turn of events , to say the least . Many other cryptocurrencies from more humble beginnings will fail in future , simply because they don ’ t have the resources to compete with these huge institutions . They will be driven by sunk costs and the crypto dream to dominate the future of money , but in many cases it won ’ t be enough . 2 . The future is stable For a cryptocurrency to be successful , two things need to happen : there has to be a reason why people want to use it , and they have to trust it . People will generally trust a coin or token thanks to the underpinning , the decentralised cryptographic ledger systems on which this industry is built . This means that the basis upon which the market judges if a new launch will stand or fall is mainly its use case . There are now altcoins in existence offering everything from new ways to to units of exchange in the . But more generally , in a world in which it is no longer enough to simply claim to have launched a better Bitcoin , the market ’ s attention has pivoted towards . Stablecoins are cryptocurrencies that are designed to avoid the wild volatility of cousins like Bitcoin by being pegged or backed by assets like traditional currencies or precious metals . They are designed to encourage people to use cryptocurrency for everyday buying and selling , while also offering a stable store of value for traders on the many crypto exchanges that don ’ t deal in traditional currencies . Examples include and , both of which are equivalent to US $ 1 . The fact that it takes considerable financial resources and infrastructure to make such coins operational is again likely to favour large institutions – witness Facebook ’ s to launch the Libra stablecoin , for instance . 3 . Losses more foul than fair Many investors have lost money through scams in the crypto world . One recent notorious example is the alleged , in which investors were promised guaranteed 300 % returns for investing Bitcoin or US dollars with a Nevada-based outfit . The money was supposed to be ploughed into foreign exchange options and altcoins , but was allegedly instead used to pay off other investors in the scheme . Fortune magazine that OneCoin may have generated losses in excess of the US $ 19.4 billion ( £15 billion ) racked up by in 2008 . Somewhat different was , an exchange in which investors could swap Bitcoin for Bitconnect coins , which would be lent out with claimed returns of up to 120 % per year . After longstanding ponzi accusations , the US authorities stepped in last year and the exchange . Bitconnect coins plunged 96 % in value , creating huge losses , though they still exist and trade today . An alternative problem is hackers raiding exchanges . The most infamous example is the of 2014 , in which over 850,000 bitcoins were stolen and never recovered . More recently the Binance exchange , one of the world ’ s largest , hacked several times , costing investors tens of millions of dollars . One other was that of Gerald Cotten , the 30-year-old founder of Canadian cryptocurrency exchange Quadriga , who died a year ago . Because nobody had access to his passwords , the investments of 115,000 customers worth US $ 137m were unrecoverable . When a court-appointed auditor was eventually able to access his account , it turned out the assets had all been sold months before Cotten died . We fully expect these sorts of problems to continue – and this shouldn ’ t be surprising . We are talking about a toxic combination of anonymous technology that is largely unregulated , poorly understood , and cheap and easy to move around the world – and many people willing to kiss frogs in their search for a lucrative prince .
Blockchain ’ s first revolutionary product could be online ID November 29 , 2019 3.15pm GMT Sheffield Hallam University Author Deputy Head of Department ( Finance , Accounting and Business Systems ) , Sheffield Hallam University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list No more fakes . In , PayPal ’ s chief executive , Dan Schulman , recently discussed the prospects for – the encrypted , decentralised online ledger system that underpins Bitcoin and other cutting-edge projects . While talking about blockchain ’ s potential for improving how people make payments around the world , Schulman said : We think there ’ s a lot of promise to blockchain technology … but it really needs to do something that the traditional rails [ of the interntional payments system ] can ’ t do . Most people think that blockchain is about efficiency , but the system today is pretty efficient . There are middlemen sometimes in between , but the rails of it are pretty efficient . So we think a lot of the neat stuff that can happen on blockchain is around identity , for example . Schulman was referencing around payments that has been going for a few years . Without getting too technical , the main benefits of blockchain payments are that they are not controlled by middlemen , so there are no fees to pay ; and transactions can ’ t be hacked and changed once they are on the ledger . But at the same time , they are not yet as quick at processing transactions as the traditional system – which as Schulman argues , is fast enough in any case . Regulation is also a major issue : people on either end of a blockchain payment are completely anonymous . This presents major issues for everything from money laundering to being able to reclaim payments if you accidentally credit the wrong address . In short , blockchain-based payments technology is very easy , but policy and regulation are much harder . For PayPal , which relies on the international banking system , there is still no contest . The real you So why was Schulman much more bullish about the prospects for blockchain around online identity ? Interestingly , it relates to one of the technology ’ s weaknesses in payments : anonymity . Much of the that takes place results from the fact that we don ’ t know who we ’ re talking to . If we could all encrypt our online identities on blockchains so that we could completely trust who were are dealing with , it could overcome this problem . This isn ’ t just theory : there are numerous interesting developments in the offing . Take the UK government , which like many countries is increasingly moving interactions with the public online . This includes benefits , taxation and other services such as passport and driving licence applications . Yet like all governments , it faces a major challenge from the fact that citizens lack a unique online identifier . This fraudsters to steal nearly £50 billion worth of government services every year in the UK . For this reason , the government is blockchain as a potential solution . Another very interesting application , currently by the UK government as part of the same project , is . Blockchains could provide a way of guaranteeing that every person queuing up to vote is who they say they are – or allow people to vote online , potentially with big benefits to turnout . Australia at idea this , too , having recently trialled allowing voters in South Australia to identify themselves via blockchain technology for a minor council election . Meanwhile , New South Wales a trial earlier in 2019 using a blockchain for identity verification based on people ’ s driving licences . It enabled participants to prove their identity and age for things like buying alcohol and gambling without the need for a physical ID card . The trials concluded that the technology is not yet mature enough , and that ID-verification can still be achieved better with current technologies . Nonetheless , New South Wales is with a new large-scale trial of a driver licence registration system based on a blockchain platform at the end of 2019 , covering some 140,000 licence holders . Another country to watch closely is China . It sees blockchain products as a good mechanism for regulation . Given the huge market that China represents , if the government decides to sanction ( or indeed mandate ) the use of online identity underpinned by blockchain it will give a phenomenal boost to the technology . It also raises the worrying prospect of the government being able to monitor all the purchasing transactions of its citizens , were it to introduce a system in which it knew the identities of everyone on the blockchain . The business opportunity Numerous blue-chip tech companies are vying to be part of this blockchain ID future – pointing to the potential for a very big market . IBM is trialling the “ alpha ” version of , an ID system underpinned by blockchain technology aimed at both businesses and governments . If typical software industry production cycles for large projects are anything to go by , a market-ready product could be two to three years away . Microsoft , too , is blockchain identity systems based on its well established and very successful Azure cloud computing platform . Either of these systems could potentially provide the kinds of services that governments are starting to envisage . As for corporate clients , one application could be online retail , which of cybercrime . These systems might provide a reliable means of identifying a buyer to confirm they are authorised to pay . Presumably this would be underpinned by something akin to transaction fees per payment . Given the hundreds of billions of transactions that take place every day , the potential revenues could clearly be enormous . This is why companies like PayPal can not stay on the sidelines . Blockchain hype or not , you don ’ t want to be of this industry , if or when encrypted ID becomes the next killer online technology . Until governments of major economies around the world are prepared to significantly overhaul financial systems to accept cryptocurrencies as mainstream payment methods , the less glamorous business of taking an ID-verification cut from billions of payment transactions might be the safer bet . And since this is very similar to the fee-taking business model that made PayPal a giant , it will be very interesting to see what Schulman does next .
When China and other big countries launch cryptocurrencies , it will kick off a global revolution December 12 , 2019 12.07pm GMT Lund University Author Doctoral Researcher , Lund University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Cash of the titans . One of the hottest topics in cryptocurrencies is the prospect of major economies launching state-backed digital coins . China ’ s central bank plans for what is currently known as the Digital Currency Electronic Payment ( DCEP ) . It could launch within the next 18 months , while the European Central Bank at something similar . Meanwhile , Russia has been a state-backed cryptoruble for several years , and its e-krona project . Indeed , several countries have got there already : and the tiny now have digital coins that sit alongside their existing currencies , while others such as and have tried but failed to gain traction . Make no mistake , these developments will completely change the international monetary system . Today ’ s system dates to the , in which to create a stable trading environment the Allied nations agreed to peg their currencies to the US dollar and the US agreed to peg the dollar to gold . The dollar has been at the heart of the monetary system ever since , despite Bretton Woods being gradually replaced by free-floating exchange rates after the dollar/gold commitment was abandoned by the Americans in the 1970s . Today , of international payments and of the world ’ s total foreign exchange reserves are in US dollars . The euro takes a more minor but still considerable proportion : over 30 % of international payments and 20 % of reserves . All other currencies are trivial by comparison . US on top American financial dominance means that the Federal Reserve almost acts as the central bank of the world , since whatever its monetary policy committee decides to do with dollar interest rates has huge consequences everywhere . Together with the dollar ’ s dominance of the , this was pivotal in maintaining the international monetary order for years by reducing transaction costs and speeding up globalisation . In recent years , however , the picture has changed . With heightened tensions between the world ’ s major powers , many commentators the Americans of playing the system to their own economy ’ s advantage without proper regard for the consequences further afield . There are also serious concerns about the US using international payments as a political tool , for instance by leaning on SWIFT to exclude Iranian banks over the uranium enrichment row – despite objections the EU . Arguably , dollar dominance is now hindering the deepening of globalisation . Many countries are making moves that are changing this situation , however . The UK , France and Germany have as an alternative means of trading with Iran , for instance , and six other EU countries have recently joined . There has been a in the number of bilateral agreements between central banks that allow two countries to swap currencies directly , a large number involving China . Meanwhile , a number of countries , Germany and the Netherlands , have been gold reserves from vaults in the US where they had long been stored . Yet by comparison , major sovereign digital currencies based on blockchain technology would be revolutionary . are encrypted ledgers for storing information that are decentralised rather than being under any country ’ s or company ’ s control . When applied to international payments , this offers of much more transparent and cheaper transactions than SWIFT . It could cut the payments time lag from a couple of days to one second , and the cost from 0.01 % to almost nothing . It will have the capacity to handle far higher volumes of payments , partly since they won ’ t require bank accounts or . Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and XRP have been a good experiment blockchains for international payments . Yet when countries issue equivalents of their own , these will have even more advantages . They will be backed by states , and completely decentralised cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin will not be able to compete with this . What the future looks like While technological change has been incredibly fast in the information era , the system of international payments has lagged behind . But once sovereign digital currencies start taking off , this will suddenly change . Just like smartphones quickly eliminated most old cell phones , no countries will be able to reject blockchain payments for long . So while , for example , the US Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin that his country does not see itself launching a digital dollar in the next five years , there will be a moment when the political centre of gravity will shift and everyone will join the revolution . After the and the really mushroom in the next couple of years , it will be possible to replace the existing system even faster . This will be the beginning of a new international monetary era . Instead of passively accepting US dollars as settlement currency in international trade , buyers and sellers will be able to choose freely from a variety of currencies . We are also likely to see a series of new powerful regional currencies , along with opportunities for the currencies of small countries with high credibility and advanced financial industries . Countries and their central banks will be competing freely with one another in this market , knowing that if they implement policies that devalue their currency , international traders will just choose rival currencies instead . Beyond that , countries will form cryptocurrency unions to regulate currencies and platforms , standardise technology and maintain the stability of the system . New clearing systems will emerge , along with . In short , it will be a whole new user-centred financial ecosystem . Whenever there are innovations in payment methods , there always follows a surge in demand . China ’ s Alipay and WeChat Pay . More recently we are seeing similar explosive demand for the likes of and . Yet these are primarily domestic stories . Sovereign digital currencies should produce a surge in international trade and cooperation . There will be new economic growth as more small players join the global market and consumers enjoy a wider range of goods and services at lower costs . This may seem threatening to those who benefit from the existing system , but it will be more than outweighed by capitalising on what comes next . The question for different countries is whether they embrace change or try and defend the status quo . As Facebook ’ s Mark Zuckerberg American lawmakers in response to China ’ s DCEP plan , “ while we debate these issues , the rest of the world isn ’ t waiting ” . The sooner countries shift , the better placed they are likely to be for what lies ahead .
Bitcoin ’ s threat to the global financial system is probably at an end January 6 , 2020 11.41am GMT Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list No ifs or bits . 2020 could well be the year that the cryptocurrency dream dies . This is not to say that cryptocurrencies will die altogether – far from it . But to all the financial romantics who have cheered the rise of bitcoin and other digital currencies over the past decade , there is a reckoning coming . Like it or not , the vision of a world in which these currencies liberate money from the clutches of central banks and other corporate giants is fading rapidly . It is not that these currencies have no place in the future of money . The encrypted blockchain technology that underpins them is extremely difficult for governments to control , so it is unlikely that they will ever be eliminated . In any case , they have a valid role to play as a geopolitical hedge – witness in bitcoin and cryptocurrencies after the latest escalation in tensions between the US and Iran , for instance . But 11 years on from bitcoin ’ s , cryptocurrencies are a long way from supplanting the financial system . At the time of writing , the all the bitcoin in circulation is US $ 133 billion ( £102 billion ) ; in comparison , the market value of all the world ’ s gold is , while the total worth of mainstream currencies worldwide is roughly the . No new hope The so-called bitcoin maximalists foresee a day when their currency of choice rises into the top league . They point to the expected in May – the moment every four years when the number of new coins being added to the network is halved – as the next event that will drive prices up . Yet the long-term prospect for bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies is stasis on the peripheries of the financial system . The chances of a new bitcoin look increasingly slim : it ’ s several years since ethereum rose to become the prime challenger , before falling back to a fraction of the bitcoin price ( click on the chart below to make it bigger ) . Bitcoin vs altcoins More importantly , a much bigger threat to the current system is afoot – as evidenced by to get its libra digital currency off the ground . JP Morgan has a JPM coin for , while numerous other major banks are follow suit . Other tech giants like , and are rumoured to be looking at launching rival currencies as well . Their model is what are known as stablecoins – a sort of crypto hybrid that lives on blockchains but is pegged to mainstream currencies . But aside from this connection to the status quo , these multinationals would be challenging sovereign money . They want to opt out of the clunky system that they have been forced to operate in , transaction fees and international payment delays , to present customers with an alluring alternative instead . The reason these companies are not throwing their weight behind bitcoin et al is because today ’ s cryptocurrencies have drawbacks as the mainstream system . Their prices are too volatile to act as a serious store of value , for instance , while their ability to process financial transactions is not yet particularly impressive . It has dawned on the corporate giants that as per their products or services , they can make money part of their brand – part of the customer experience . Sell people goods and services , yes , but also offer them a new monetary system to take care of the purchases . It begins to look like almost total control . The empire strikes back The state has been late to wake up to this challenge , but has now done so in a powerful and surprising way . The traditional global infrastructure has proved strong enough to the corporates at least temporarily . Yet make no mistake – the goalposts have completely changed , and it will be difficult to present a united regulatory front around the world . Ironically , it is the same lack of global uniform regulatory approval for the existing cryptocurrencies that has hindered their meaningful adoption . The other response under examination is to launch state cryptocurrencies . China and Russia are in pole position to launch the first within a couple of years . Deutsche Bank published a report cryptocurrencies could overtake national fiat currencies within ten years , envisaging that these state-backed versions will lead the charge . In short , the future of cryptocurrency lies in either corporate or sovereign digital coins – or more likely , an uneasy cohabitation of the two . The system supposedly under threat from bitcoin and the other so-called bank killers is instead assimilating them . The coins that emerge won ’ t blockchains , acting more akin to Paypal or WeChat Pay than as cryptocurrencies as we know them . Where the previous half century saw the rise of corporates to a size and influence comparable to nation states , the next half century could produce a new paradigm in which they increasingly behave like nation states . When we reflect on the way these companies already manage our data , the way they exert lobbying influence on our governments , the trend is clearly well underway . Call it the next phase of globalisation . Money in 2030 will probably therefore be almost unrecognisable compared to what we use today . The dream of universal people-powered monetary substitutes is being crushed by this unanticipated but in hindsight inevitable institutionalisation . It is from within the multinational world that the “ next bitcoin ” will emerge – wrapped in the liveries of a corporate brand , if not a sovereign flag . As for the great dream of bitcoin liberation , may it rest in peace .
The Bank of Canada ’ s digital currency would let the federal government monitor spending . A national digital currency has serious privacy implications February 5 , 2020 11.04pm GMT McMaster University Author PhD Student , Political Science , McMaster University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The widespread use of cryptocurrency as an alternative method of payment has led to a growing digital ecosystem over the years . Governments are behind the curve , continuing to wrestle with how to . The Bank of Canada has been actively exploring the option of a to address the perceived threat of cryptocurrency for several years . This national digital currency would be centralized , meaning that the bank would be able to monitor and regulate the transactions within that network . Cryptocurrency is a decentralized digital currency that relies on the application of cryptography to conduct financial transactions and protect against counterfeit and fraud . Cryptocurrency is an alternative to sovereign currencies that are issued by state governments , like the Canadian dollar . My doctoral research explores how states try to regulate cryptocurrency — a disruptive technology that threatens sovereignty that ’ s resistant to being controlled by any state unilaterally . Regulating cryptocurrencies The use of cryptocurrencies has broad implications for the global economy as well as the role of the state . As a decentralized , peer-to-peer payment network that allows individuals to share information with one another without the need for a middleman , cryptocurrency circumvents the control central banks have over money supply . Powered by blockchain technology , no single third party is in control of the transactions and data stored on the distributed ledger . As such , the use of cryptocurrency as a means of payment has the potential to undermine the ability of the state to track currency movement . As a result , governments have moved to curtail cryptocurrencies , in some cases referring to them as a direct threat to and . This move to classify cryptocurrency as a threat contradicts statements made by Mark Carney , the former governor of the Bank of Canada and current governor of the Bank of England . Carney challenged the role of the world ’ s reserve currency , . Federal digital currency In a report commissioned by the Bank of Canada , findings suggest that . Government-owned digital currencies would , reducing transparency due to their centralized governance model . Private blockchains attempt to take the advantages of blockchain technology without giving up all of the control . This centralized approach increases the risk of a single point of failure as all of the data is stored in a single system . Read more : Storing immense amounts of data in a centralized location has not always been successful , . Furthermore , there would be easier access to data since hackers would only have to compromise a smaller number of nodes , compared to the amount of nodes in a public decentralized network . Management by consensus Traditional cryptocurrencies are decentralized and the transactions are validated and governed through consensus . This means that a majority of the nodes in the network would have to agree that a transaction occurred in order for it to be validated . The Bank of Canada ’ s exploration has suggested that establishing a digital currency would provide them with . These personal details and data could then be , such as law enforcement , which currently require a warrant to investigate the spending habits of an individual . The notion of collecting more information on Canadians through a raises serious privacy concerns . While cash continues to be the only way to keep your transactions anonymous , the use of cryptocurrency leaves a detailed trail . By inserting themselves into the mix , the Bank of Canada aims to assert a new level of state surveillance in the digital economy . Controlling the cash flow Although some cryptocurrencies provide users with aliases , there is no guarantee that the Bank of Canada ’ s digital currency would provide citizens with that same level of anonymity . A national digital currency that collects information on consumers has serious privacy implications , and one of the possible outcomes would be to replace physical money entirely . Institutional monitoring through digital currency spending habits raises concerns around the surveillance of minors , undocumented citizens and our right to privacy . As countries prepare to and their own national digital currencies , they will also be faced with the issues associated with centralized governance . Spending freely Every bit of data that the central bank can control , view and share about Canadians and their spending habits are a potential learning advantage for the privileged bankers , but not for the rest of society . Every restriction that the Bank of Canada faces , such as the increased use of decentralized cryptocurrency among the population , is a weakness — hence its experimentation with private distributed ledger technology . The introduction of any centralized cryptocurrency through the Bank of Canada must be subject to scrutiny since it would likely lead to an unprecedented level of state surveillance on Canadians . As we continue to experience more government and institutional monitoring , we must ask ourselves whether central banks are the right institutions to develop new digital currencies . What the Bank of Canada fails to understand is that . The Bank of Canada ’ s approach to digital currency is no exception .
Altcoin season 2.0 : why bitcoin has been outgunned by crypto rivals since new year February 19 , 2020 3.56pm GMT Manchester Metropolitan University Authors Senior Lecturer , Finance , Manchester Metropolitan University Research Fellow in Economics , Manchester Metropolitan University Disclosure statement Partners The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list ‘ We have you surrounded ! ’ When bitcoin was the dizzying heights of almost US $ 20,000 ( £15,360 ) in December 2017 , it was the peak of the previous bull run in cryptocurrencies . It was a classic bubble , in line with such phenomena by the American financial economist Hyman Minsky , and investors should arguably have seen it coming . It was not until late 2018 that bitcoin finally bottomed out at slightly above US $ 3,000 , though for many the “ crypto winter ” dragged on for much of 2019 as well . Several ups and downs later , the bull market looks to be back . Since the turn of the year , bitcoin has climbed from just over US $ 7,000 to the low US $ 10,000s . Few asset classes can boast a rise of about 40 % in six weeks , though bitcoin enthusiasts like to point out that bitcoin is the asset of the past decade – however choppy the journey along the way . Having said that , bitcoin is certainly not where you would have made most money if you had bought cryptocurrencies at the start of January . There have been even greater price gains from leading altcoins such as ethereum ( +119 % ) , ripple ( +58 % ) , bitcoin cash ( +109 % ) and bitcoin SV ( +222 % ) . So what explains their superior performance ? Bitcoin dominance These four altcoins are the largest cryptocurrencies on the market after bitcoin , representing an aggregate US $ 51 billion market capitalisation ( the value of each coin multiplied by the number of coins on the market ) . This is still fairly small compared with bitcoin ’ s US $ 178 billion market cap , but clearly the gap has been narrowing . Cryptocurrency aficionados compare bitcoin and the altcoins in terms of bitcoin dominance . This refers to bitcoin ’ s market size compared with the rest of the altcoins put together . During the early weeks of 2020 , it fell slightly from 68 % to 64 % . As the chart below shows , this is a shift from what has happened for most of the past couple of years . Bitcoin dominance For years , there has tended to be a statistically significant correlation between the performance of bitcoin and the altcoins : when bitcoin rises or falls in price , most altcoins tend to do likewise . You can track this using online tools , such as . Despite this correlation , altcoins have tended to underperform bitcoin ever since the previous bull market petered out in winter 2017-18 . Bitcoin dominance was only 39 % at the beginning of 2018 , whereas it had risen to 70 % by July 2019 and stayed around that range for most of the rest of the year . This suggests that bitcoin has acted as a safe harbour for many investors still smarting from the bubble and pop of 2017 , which was fuelled by an explosion of initial coin offerings or ICOs from new currencies entering the market . Those who didn ’ t get out of cryptocurrencies altogether probably felt the need to consolidate around an asset they trusted . Bitcoin was the obvious choice as the longest established and most widely traded asset in this class , and also the gateway cryptocurrency for many investors – their first dip of a toe in the water en route to an altcoin purchase . Other writers have pointed out that during 2019 , between bitcoin and the altcoins declined . As many other cryptocurrency projects failed to live up to the heady expectations of a year or two before , investors perhaps traded them for bitcoin in a “ flight to quality ” – a little like traditional investors when the stock market dives . Flight to altcoins ? The tilt back towards altcoins in the first weeks of 2020 may be the start of another bull-run , driven by a renewed confidence or understanding in the space . Recent favourable commercial developments have bolstered prices , such as JP Morgan ’ s with the interbank payments system on the ethereum network . The rise of the altcoins is also possibly being fuelled in part by an increasing number of coins entering the market . , it now staggeringly numbers over 5,000 . All other things being equal , this should reduce bitcoin dominance – this may be feeding through now that confidence has risen in the sector as a whole . There has also been a sector-wide boost from Coinbase , the largest cryptoasset exchange in the US . Coinbase is making a play for institutional investors by to store digital coins on their behalf outside the US . Known in the jargon as custodial solutions , Coinbase ’ s offering has two major industry kitemarks from leading accounting firm Grant Thornton , so may be attracting more institutional money into the sector . Another factor may be eagerly awaited initiatives from leading players such as the , which looks set for July 2020 . This major upgrade to the second-largest crypto network , which underpins many cryptocurrencies and enterprises in this space , is expected to make a big difference to transaction speeds among other things . One big question is whether bitcoin will start outperforming the altcoins again the so-called “ halvening ” , which is expected in May . This is the moment roughly every four years when the reward to bitcoin miners is halved , thereby reducing the number of new bitcoins available to sell on the market . Writers such as Jemima Kelly in the Financial Times that this won ’ t raise the bitcoin price because the number of coins in circulation will still be rising and the event is built into the system so should be accounted for in the price already . Yet in a young market , which is comparatively thinly traded and has no uniform global regulation , the positive sentiment around this event may have more effect on the price than the fundamentals . We have in The Conversation that the chances of bitcoin replacing the global financial system have probably ended , now that many countries and multinationals , such as Facebook , are planning to launch cryptocurrencies of their own . All the same , the latest bull market is more evidence that bitcoin is likely to persist on the peripheries , probably along with the cream of the altcoins . Whether those altcoins can continue to outperform their bitcoin matriarch is a difficult question to answer , but they are showing encouraging signs of life . who have their may have spoken too soon .
Dark web , not dark alley : why drug sellers see the internet as a lucrative safe haven March 4 , 2020 7.08pm GMT Swinburne University of Technology RMIT University Authors Associate Professor in Criminology , Swinburne University of Technology Vice Chancellor ’ s Senior Research Fellow , Social and Global Studies Centre , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list More than six years after the demise of Silk Road , the world ’ s first major , the is still home to a thriving trade in illicit drugs . These markets host hundreds , or in some cases thousands , of people who sell drugs , commonly referred to as “ vendors ” . The dark web offers vital anonymity for vendors and buyers , who use cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin to process transactions . Trade is booming despite from law enforcement and particularly “ exit scams ” , in which market admins abruptly close down sites and take all available funds . Read more : Why are these markets still seen as enticing places to sell drugs , despite the risks ? To find out , our surveyed 13 darknet drug vendors , via online encrypted interviews . They gave us a range of reasons . More profitable First , selling drugs online is safer and more profitable than doing it offline : Interviewer : So you still sell on DNMs [ darknet marketplaces ] , and prefer that to offline . Correct ? Respondent : YES . Selling offline is borderline stupid . You can make so much more money online , the risks [ in selling outside cryptomarkets ] aren ’ t even remotely worth it . Both of these claims correspond with showing that the dark web is perceived to be a safer place to buy and sell drugs . Regarding profits , darknet vendors do not have to limit their trading to face-to-face interactions , and can instead sell drugs to a potentially worldwide customer base . Read more : Less violent Encryption technologies allow vendors to communicate with customers and receive payments anonymously . The drugs are delivered in the post , so vendor and customer never have to meet in person . This protects vendors from many risks that are prevalent in other forms of drug supply , including undercover police , predatory standover tactics where suppliers may be robbed , assaulted or even killed by competitors , and customers who may inform on their supplier if caught . Other risks , such as frauds perpetrated by customers and exit scams , were considered inevitable on the dark web , but also manageable . Some respondents said that being protected from physical risk on the dark web is not only a benefit for existing drug suppliers , but may also make the activity attractive to people who would not otherwise be willing to sell drugs . While some of our respondents had previously sold drugs offline , others were uniquely attracted to the perceived safety and anonymity of the dark web : I hadn ’ t ever thought about selling drugs in any capacity because I dislike violence and it just seemed impossible to be involved in selling drugs in “ real life ” without running into some sort of confrontation pretty quickly… I was always too scared and slightly nerdy to do that and never really contemplated it seriously until the dark web . More customer-focused Some vendors told us the feeling of safety and control lets them focus on providing a more courteous service to their customers or “ clients ” : I try to provide the best products and service I can , when someone has a problem or claims [ their order was ] short on pills ( as long as they have ordered from me before ) I usually take them at their word . This is a stark contrast with perceptions of the street trade , which some of our respondents perceived not only as “ small-time ” , but also rife with danger and potential violence : The street trade is a mess . I wan na provide labelled products , good advice and service , like a real business . Not sit in a shitty car park selling $ 10 bags from a car window all day . Read more : Not just about profit Dark web vendors also pointed out the various non-material benefits of their work . These included feelings of autonomy and emancipation from boring work and onerous bosses , as well as excitement and the thrill of transgression . One respondent described it as : Exhilarating … and nerve-wracking . Seemed so alien . “ Drugs ? Online ? In the post ? Naaaah surely not. ” Plus if I ’ m honest , my inner reprobate buzzes from it . The rush of chucking a grand ’ s worth of drugs into post boxes… unreal , man . Interviewees rationalised their participation in the dark web drugs trade in a variety of ways . These included pointing out the and medicinal benefits of some illicit drugs , and the . Let ’ s face it , a LOT of people like getting high… It ’ s human nature , but to ban it and make it criminal so that it ’ s hard to get , then you get poison and people die… I can tell you that the use of darknet protects users from buying products that during traditional prohibition would likely kill much more people . It also takes drugs off the street , reducing some violent crime . These insights help us understand why the dark web is increasingly attractive , not only to consumers of illicit drugs but to the people who supply them . For those who are averse to confrontation , and who are sufficiently tech-savvy , the dark web offers an alternative to the risk and violence of dealing drugs offline .
Get used to it . While coronavirus rages , bitcoin has made a leap towards the mainstream March 27 , 2020 3.52pm GMT University of East London Author Senior Lecturer in Financial Law and Regulation , University of East London Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Anyone holding bitcoin would have watched the market with alarm in recent weeks . The virtual currency , whose price other cryptocurrencies like ethereum and litecoin largely follow , more than US $ 10,000 ( £8,206 ) in mid-February to briefly below US $ 4,000 on March 13 . Despite recovering to the mid-US $ 6,000s at the time of writing , some doomsayers whether bitcoin will soon spiral back into three figures . To add to the gloom , these shifts have broadly mimicked those of as investors first panicked about coronavirus only to be somewhat reassured by the US $ 2 trillion fiscal stimulus package to reactivate the economy . This similar pattern has cast doubt on a in the cryptocurrency industry would act as a “ safe haven ” during a downturn by moving in the opposite direction to the market as a whole . For many crypto-enthusiasts , this was one of the main attractions to buying these currencies . Bitcoin vs S & P 500 Yet while this has been unfolding , a more encouraging trend has attracted much less attention . Having banned cryptocurrencies in the past , or refused to acknowledge them as money , various countries have suddenly started recognising them in their financial laws and courts . This could well mark an important shift for these digital assets towards the mainstream . Starting guns The motivation for these shifts has been for anti-money laundering and counter terrorism set by global watchdog the Financial Actions Task Force ( FATF ) . The rules provide a useful know-your-customer/anti-money laundering framework for cryptocurrency transactions which did not exist previously and were the reason why many countries did not allow them . On February 26 , a French court a loan involving bitcoin was a consumer loan . This meant placing bitcoin in the same bracket as money and other financial assets in France for the first time , reassuring users that they will enjoy the same protections under the law . Two days later , the financial services regulator in Abu Dhabi virtual asset legislation to align with the FATF standards . Germany ’ s financial regulator , BaFin , on March 2 , shortly followed by . Having banned anonymous cryptocurrency transactions several years earlier , this is a complete change of direction from Seoul . Among other things , open a real-name bank account with an authorised Korean bank , which should reassure many investors that they can be used safely . India made a comparable U-turn on March 10 when its supreme court the central bank ’ s 2018 ban on banks transacting with cryptocurrency firms . This move had led to a drastic fall in the use of cryptocurrencies in the country . Finally , on March 16 it is developing a regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies that will establish a clear procedure for firms to become compliant with the country ’ s financial regulations and therefore to be allowed to do business with banks . This , too , reversed a 2018 ban . What now Most of these moves have been made ahead of a June deadline to get in line with the FATF standards . A total of 37 countries are FATF members , including the UK and US , and more are expected to sign up to the same rules in the coming months . So while many investors in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies will have incurred huge losses in the past month , the status of this asset class within mainstream finance looks increasingly assured . The new rules clarify the status of cryptocurrency exchanges and other firms providing services in this space , making it much easier for them to transact with banks – and by extension , everyone else . It almost certainly means that bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies will probably not be killed off by the COVID-19 crisis or indeed any other market event . With the growing market in crypto lending , these services look pivotally positioned to replace traditional banking services in the coming years . If more countries make similar moves to the ones I ’ ve highlighted above , crypto-assets could even become entrenched in the financial mainstream very soon . The only caveat is that this is far from what the creators of the crypto movement foresaw when bitcoin was originally launched in 2009 . Bitcoin was supposed to liberate the world from the financial system and the elites that control it . Now it is well on the way to being embraced by them instead .
Bitcoin halving Q & A : what it ’ s all about and what it means for the cryptocurrency May 14 , 2020 11.08am BST University of Reading Author Associate Professor of Finance , ICMA Centre , Henley Business School , University of Reading Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin miners will not get less for their efforts . Bitcoin , the first and leading cryptocurrency in terms of trading volume and market capitalisation , went through its third “ halving ” on May 11 2020 . This major adjustment to how the cryptocurrency operates has only happened twice before and happens every four years . But what does this actually mean and what impact will it have ? Q : how does bitcoin work ? Bitcoin is a digital currency that makes use of blockchain technology to store and record all transactions . First proposed in a published online in 2008 by a mysterious person ( or group of people ) called Satoshi Nakamoto . The unique features of bitcoin compared to fiat currencies like dollars or pounds are that there is no central authority or bank . Each member of the network has equal power . This decentralised network is completely transparent and all transactions can be read on the . At the same time it offers privacy in terms of who owns the cryptocurrency . Bitcoins are created ( or mined ) by so-called miners who contribute computing power to securing the network , as well as processing transactions on the network by solving complex mathematical puzzles through computational power . These miners are rewarded for their work processing the transactions on the blockchain with bitcoins . But to combat inflation , Nakamoto wrote into the code that the total number of bitcoins that will ever exist will be 21 million . Right now there are . The first ever block recorded on the bitcoin blockchain was on January 3 2009 where Nakamoto received 50 bitcoins . In the white paper , Nakamoto specified that after every 210,000 blocks the reward for miners will half . So the first halving took place on November 28 2012 where the miner ’ s reward was reduced from 50 bitcoins to 25 bitcoins . The second halving was on July 9 2016 and the miner ’ s reward was reduced from 25 bitcoins to 12.5 bitcoins . And the third , most recent halving on May 11 2020 means bitcoin miners now receive 6.25 bitcoins . Q : Why does bitcoin halve ? Nakamoto has never explained explicitly the reasons behind the halving . Some speculate the halving system was designed to distribute coins more quickly at the beginning to incentive people to join the network and mine new blocks . Block rewards are programmed to halve at regular intervals because the value of each coin rewarded is deemed likely to increase as the network expanded . However , this may lead to users holding bitcoin as a speculative asset rather than using it as a medium of exchange . Q : What impact does halving have on bitcoin ? The obvious impact is that the amount of newly mined bitcoins per day will fall from about 1,800 to 900 bitcoins and the daily revenue of miners will reduce by half . This decrease in the rate of bitcoin creation tightens supply and some argue will lead to a bullish market and an increase in the price of bitcoin . Meanwhile , the reduction of revenue for miners may squeeze out miners who are least efficient and therefore the computing power connected to the Bitcoin network may fall significantly . The previous two halvings led to the most dramatic bull runs in Bitcoin ’ s history , although initially there was a brief sell-off . Marcus Swanepoel , co-founder and CEO of Luno , a cryptocurrency wallet which lets you store and carry out bitcoin transactions , bitcoin may achieve a growth of 270 % between this and the fourth halving in 2024 . Q : How is coronavirus affecting things ? Although bitcoin has gained more than 20 % since the beginning of the year , where this halving may differ from its predecessors is the volatile and uncertain economic environment that it has taken place in . The International Monetry Fund predicted a 3 % shrinking of global growth in its April forecast and this . In the UK , the Bank of England a decrease of 30 % in the country ’ s GDP during the first half of 2020 . Some argue that against fiat currencies that are vulnerable to devaluation in times of economic crisis . But others as people knew the halving was going to happen so it should be already priced into the market activity . The only certainty is that the growth of new bitcoins has halved . It remains to be seen what impact this will have on the price and interest of this cryptocurrency . Correction : a previous version of this article incorrectly said Michael Dubrovsky speculated the halving system was designed to distribute coins more quickly at the beginning to incentive people to join the network and mine new blocks .
Three ways blockchain could get the world to act against the climate crisis June 11 , 2020 1.13pm BST University of Glasgow Author Lecturer in International Relations , University of Glasgow Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The world has failed to halt global warming . Four years after the signing of the Paris Agreement , most experts predict global warming will exceed the agreed thresholds , with disastrous . As much as the world faces a climate crisis , it also faces a climate governance crisis : we know what must be done to halt climate change but we do not know yet . New mechanisms are evidently needed . is one technology that has the potential to boost global cooperation for climate action , as I explore . Blockchain is a data structure that stores information as a series of cryptographically linked blocks , which are distributed simultaneously to all participants in a network . The information stored on a blockchain is tamper-resistant . This is useful for generating a single source of truth for any kind of information . Blockchain technology provides the building blocks for what are known as , which have been discussed ( and criticised ) as potential alternative governance mechanisms at . But the benefits of such a decentralised organisation at the international level would be much higher . Imagine a decentralised climate organisation , based on blockchain , in which states , companies , and individuals participate and whose interactions are facilitated by so-called . These contracts are pieces of computer code running on top of the blockchain , which makes them virtually unstoppable . A common — let us call it — allows climate commitments by states to be linked with the flourishing ecosystem of transnational climate initiatives and individual climate action . Such an organisation would help get the world together to act against climate change in three ways . 1 . Boosting transparency Coordinated action against climate change requires better information . One important task is to ensure that different stakeholders do not for the same carbon-offsetting activity , such as two companies paying for the same forest to be planted . To avoid such , a publicly shared digital ledger of carbon credits , as currently piloted by the nations , would offer a more than a central agency settling transactions of carbon credits . Read more : Another ( more challenging ) task would be to verify that carbon-offsetting activities have actually occurred . Blockchain technology , combined with such as devices , could tap new information sources . Meanwhile , smart contracts offer an efficient way to reward critical tasks like verifying emission reductions and adaptation measures at the . 2 . Enforcing commitments Climate change is an area ripe with broken promises . Consider the decision by US President Donald Trump to from the Paris Agreement . In other countries , worries have grown that the COVID-19 pandemic will government efforts to honour their climate-related commitments . Through smart contracts , blockchain technology could mitigate the risk of backsliding , provided that states underpinned their commitments with a . If states fail to comply with their emission reduction targets , their deposit could be taken and redistributed as greencoins to those that have abated carbon emissions , for example by , or other . More effective enforcement of commitments through smart contracts is only possible where resources have been staked upon commitments . An added benefit of eliminating uncertainty around enforcement is to entice more ambitious climate commitments from those who are concerned about being cheated upon by more powerful bodies . 3 . Increasing ambition Business as usual will not be enough to confront the impending climate crisis . A decentralised climate organisation would allow progressive transnational bodies to “ buy ” pro-climate transformation in laggard countries . For example , transnational corporations including Apple , Google and Walmart , ExxonMobil , BP , Shell , and other firms to withdraw from the Paris Agreement . Under a decentralised climate organisation , they could have devised smart contracts offering compensation to affected workers in exchange for more robust commitment by the US government to decarbonise the economy . A related benefit of this approach would be to make their demands transparent , which would help less powerful bodies hold corporations to account on their climate-related pledges . For example , Microsoft it would invest US $ 1 billion to become a carbon-negative enterprise . This is all very well , but it could be rhetoric . If Microsoft underpinned this pledge by a smart contract with an appropriate stake , it would become inevitable , with huge benefits for everyone whose fortunes depend on powerful players like Microsoft following through on their promises . A decentralised climate organisation would combine the resources of billions and unite their efforts in combating climate change . Anyone in a blockchain network connected to the system could earn greencoins by planting trees ( like “ mining ” in the Bitcoin system ) . This would be profitable because greencoins have real value — they would be linked to the international commitments by states that have staked monetary resources on them . People could also purchase greencoins to support climate action . By increasing the exchange value of greencoins , these people would provide incentives for more rapid tree-planting . Blockchain technology is ideally suited to settle these transactions automatically , provided appropriate systems for verification and the incentive system underlying effective decentralised verification are in place . No panacea Blockchain-based climate governance has undeniable theoretical benefits , but there would be significant obstacles to its realisation . While the blockchain ensures that once-recorded data is tamper-resistant , it can do little to ensure that the data that is brought onto the blockchain can be trusted . Start-ups like have proposed decentralised networks of information feeds as a promising solution to this problem , but for some applications , suitable solutions are hard to find . A blockchain-based climate organisation might not come to fruition if key players decided not to join . Powerful states or companies might be especially unwilling to participate in a system that makes broken promises immediately transparent and that automates the punishment process . But as long as there was enough momentum , they might slowly be incentivised to get involved . A virtual entity for climate governance would also require people to accept to be governed by algorithms . And at the moment , this might be the of all .
The Twitter hack targeted the rich and famous . But we all lose if trusted accounts can be hijacked July 16 , 2020 8.02am BST The University of Melbourne Author Senior Research Fellow in Digital Ethics , The University of Melbourne Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The list of US figures whose Twitter accounts were reads like a Who ’ s Who of the tech and celebrity worlds : Tesla boss Elon Musk , Amazon chief Jeff Bezos , Microsoft founder Bill Gates , former president Barack Obama , current Democratic nominee Joe Biden , celebrities Kanye West and Kim Kardashian , billionaires Warren Buffett and Mike Bloomberg , the corporate accounts of Apple and Uber , and more besides . The point of the hack ? To lure followers into sending US $ 1,000 in Bitcoin , with the classic scammer ’ s false promise of sending back twice as as much . After a , Twitter said it believed the incident was “ a coordinated social engineering attack by people who successfully targeted some of our employees with access to internal systems and tools ” . The details are still far from clear , but it seems likely someone with administrative rights may have granted the hackers access , perhaps inadvertently , despite the presence of two-factor authentication on the accounts – widely considered the gold standard of online security . It appears insiders may have been involved , although the story is . The use of the niche currency Bitcoin limited the number of potential victims , but also makes the hackers ’ loot impossible to trace . Ironically enough , Bitcoin is a currency designed for a post-trust world , and the anonymity of its transactions makes the hackers even harder to track down . Whom do we trust ? This is not the first time we have seen the complex and profound impact social media can have . In 2013 , , the official Twitter account of the respected Associated Press news agency , and tweeted : Breaking : Two Explosions in the White House and Barack Obama is Injured . The stock market but bounced back within six minutes , illustrating the interconnected systems that move so quickly a human can not intervene - algorithms read the headlines and the stock market collapsed , albeit fleetingly . By shorting stocks , whoever hacked AP ’ s Twitter account stood to make enormous profits from the temporary stock market tank . We do not know what the financial benefits , , to the hackers in 2013 were . Read more : This week ’ s Twitter hack definitely had financial motives . The Bitcoin scammers in this recent hack netted . More sinister still , however , are the implications for democracy if a similar hack were carried out with political motives . What if a reliable source , such as a national newspaper ’ s official account , tweets that a presidential candidate has committed a crime , or is seriously ill , on the eve of an election ? What if false information about international armed attacks is shared from a supposedly reliable source such as a government defence department ? The impacts of such events would be profound , and go far beyond financial loss . This is the inherent danger of our growing reliance on social media platforms as authoritative sources of information . As media institutions decline in size , funding and impact , the public increasingly relies on social media platforms for news . The Bitcoin scam is a reminder that any social media platform can be hacked , tampered with , or used to spread false information . Even gold-standard technical systems can be outwitted , perhaps by exploiting human vulnerabilities . A disgruntled employee , a careless password selection , or even a device used in a public space can pose grave risks . Who ’ s in charge ? The question of who polices the vast power accrued by social media platforms is a crucial one . Twitter ’ s reaction to the hack – temporarily shutting down all accounts verified with the “ blue tick ” that connotes public interest – raised the ire of high-profile users ( and prompted among those not bestowed with Twitter ’ s mark of legitimacy ) . But the underlying question is : who decides what is censored or shut down , and under what circumstances ? And should companies do this themselves , or do they need a regulatory framework to ? Broader questions have already been raised about when Twitter , Facebook or other social media platforms should or should not censor content . Facebook was for not removing oppressive posts about Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar , and what the United Nations referred to as a genocide ensued . Twitter much later that had been inciting violence , with some criticism . Read more : What is the responsibility of such platforms , and who should govern them , as we become more heavily reliant on social media for our news ? As the platforms ’ power and influence continue to grow , we need rigorous frameworks to hold them accountable . Last month , the Australian government pledged a A $ 1.3 billion funding increase and an extra 500 staff for the Australian Signals Directorate , to boost its ability to defend Australia from attacks . Australia ’ s forthcoming 2020 Cyber Security Strategy will hopefully also include strategies to proactively improve cyber security and digital literacy . In an idea world , social media giants would regulate themselves . But here in the real world , the stakes are too high to let the platforms police themselves .
What is DeFi and why is it the hottest ticket in cryptocurrencies ? August 26 , 2020 11.26am BST Nottingham Trent University Author Associate Professor of Cryptofinance and Digital Investment , Nottingham Trent University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list There has been massive growth in decentralised finance in the past three years . One area in cryptocurrencies attracting huge attention is DeFi or decentralised finance . This refers to financial services using , which are automated enforceable agreements that don ’ t need intermediaries like a bank or lawyer and use online blockchain technology instead . Between September 2017 and the time of writing , the total value locked up in DeFi contracts from US $ 2.1 million to US $ 6.9 billion ( £1.6 million to £5.3 billion ) . Since the beginning of August alone it has risen by US $ 2.9 billion . This has driven a massive rise in the value ( market capitalisation ) of all the tradeable tokens that are used for DeFi smart contracts . It is US $ 15 billion , the beginning of the month . Numerous tokens have risen in value by three or four times in a year – and some considerably more . For example , has increased more than 20-fold , and almost 200-fold . So if you had bought £1,000 of Aave tokens in August 2019 , they would now be worth nearly £200,000 . Maximum disruption DeFi , most of it built on the , is the next step in the revolution in disruptive financial technology that began 11 years ago with bitcoin . One area in which in which these decentralised applications ( dApps ) have taken off is cryptocurrency trading on decentralised exchanges ( dexs ) such as . These are entirely peer-to-peer , without any company or other institution providing the platform . Other DeFi services now in use allow you to : DeFi is sometimes known as “ Lego money ” because you can stack dApps together to maximise your returns . For example , you could buy a stablecoin such as DAI and then lend it on Compound to earn interest , your smartphone . Though many of today ’ s dApps are niche , future applications could have a big impact on day-to-day life . For example , you will probably be able to purchase a piece of land or house on a DeFi platform under a mortgage agreement whereby you repay the price over a period of years . The deeds would be put up in tokenised form on a blockchain ledger as collateral and , in the event that you defaulted on your repayments , the deeds would automatically shift to the lender . Because no lawyers or banks would be required , it could make the whole process of buying and selling houses cheaper . Why the craze ? First , regulators have been behind the curve , and DeFi has been able to flourish in this vacuum . For instance , in traditional unsecured lending , there is a legal requirement that lenders and borrowers know one another ’ s identities and that the lender assesses the borrower ’ s ability to repay the debt . In DeFi , there are no such requirements . Instead , everything is about mutual trust and preserving privacy . Regulators are having to weigh the delicate balance between stifling innovation and failing to protect society from such risks as individuals putting their money into an unregulated space , or banks and other financial institutions potentially being unable to make a living as intermediaries . But it seems more sensible to embrace change – and that seems to be happening . In July , the US Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) made a major shift towards embracing DeFi an ethereum-based fund , Arca , for the first time . This is welcome and important , since one of the major challenges towards financial innovation is the hostile environment created by archaic regulations written for a bygone era . This has caused some DeFi projects to fail – including major ones such as New-Jersey-based Basis , which to investors in 2018 when it concluded it couldn ’ t work within the SEC rules . A second reason for the DeFi surge is that mainstream players are getting involved . Many high-street financial institutions are beginning to accept DeFi , and seeking ways to participate . For example , 75 of the world ’ s biggest banks are trialling blockchain technology to speed up payments as part of the , spearheaded by JP Morgan , ANZ and Royal Bank of Canada . Major asset management funds are starting to take DeFi seriously as well . Most prominent is , the world ’ s largest crypto investment fund . In the first half of 2020 , it was managing over US $ 5.2 billion of crypto assets , including US $ 4.4 billion of bitcoin . Third is the effect of COVID-19 . The pandemic has driven global interest rates even lower . , such as the eurozone , are now in negative territory and others such as and could potentially follow . In this climate , DeFi potentially offers much higher returns to savers than high-street institutions : Compound , for example , has been offering an annualised interest rate of 6.75 % for those who save with stablecoin Tether . Not only do you get interest , you also receive Comp tokens , which is an added attraction . With without bank accounts in possession of a smartphone , DeFi also has the potential to open up finance to them . One final important reason for the surge in people putting money into DeFi tokens is to avoid being left out of their explosive growth . Many tokens are worth nothing or close to nothing in practical terms , so we are seeing a lot of irrational exuberance . But like it or not , we are heading towards a new financial system that is more liberalised and decentralised than before . The central question is how best to guide its development with checks and balances that minimise the risks and spread the potential benefits as widely as possible . That is the challenge for the next few years .
NZ ’ s cyber security centre warns more attacks likely following stock market outages August 31 , 2020 8.12am BST Auckland University of Technology Author Head of the Department of Computer Science , Auckland University of Technology Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation NZ . provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The Government Communications Security Bureau ( ) has to all New Zealand businesses to be prepared for cyber attacks , following almost a week of on the New Zealand stock exchange ( ) . The attacks have caused outages , sometimes for hours , of NZX ’ s public-facing website since Tuesday last week . This week , it under a new arrangement that allows it to post information to alternative platforms . The attacks are part of and the government will likely share information via Interpol and government-to-government links , including the intelligence alliance know as Five Eyes . Creating millions of bots The type of attack is known as a Distributed Denial of Service ( ) . The attacker infects large numbers , often thousands or even millions , of computers with a virus that allows the attacker to instruct the infected computer - known as a “ bot ” - to send thousands of requests for data to the target . Read more : In effect , this means millions of attempts to access a website at the same time . The website being attacked can ’ t respond to each one quickly enough so either it simply stops responding or responds to some but not all data requests . Some people get the most up-to-date page and others don ’ t . This is particularly damaging for financial information sites such as a stock market . They have a legal duty to give equal access to different users . They would normally shut down and stop trading for a while rather than allow some people to get information before others . These attacks are not designed to steal data or do insider trading . They are generally set up to demand ransom from the victims , usually asking for thousands of dollars paid in bitcoin or another cryptocurrency which is effectively untraceable . Governments , terrorist organisations , political groups and even pranksters have also been known to use these attacks . DDoS software is available on the dark web but also not very difficult to write . In many cases the people owning the bots will not be aware anything strange is happening . The current attacks Multi-day attacks have been rare but are becoming more common . The size of these attacks , including how many bots are used and their capacity to send requests , has been increasing . Such multi-day attacks are potentially risky for the attackers as the defence team will be , often using , and should be able to respond more quickly to block illegitimate requests . The defence against such attacks is based on being able to cope with the large number of requests , either by moving the website to a cloud-based system that can increase capacity quickly , or identifying bot requests and filtering them out by setting up a “ whitelist ” of legitimate users and excluding others . This is normally done by firewalls at the level of each attacked entity , the internet service provider or , as in the case of New Zealand , at a country ’ s electronic border ( for example , the Southern Cross trans-Pacific network of communications cables ) . If an attack is coming from inside New Zealand , security software on the bot computer can normally remove the infection with up-to-date anti-virus software . Internet service providers can also detect this activity and may warn users or disconnect the infected machine until it is cleaned . But in this case , the attacks are coming from outside New Zealand . The COVID-19 pandemic means millions of people are working from home around the world , outside their normal corporate security , often using the family computer . Some people may be less careful about downloading software , particularly on illegal streaming sites , and may be using free or unsecured wifi networks . This makes much easier . Read more : How to repond Assuming this is a criminal gang , financial institutes are an attractive target . They rely on availability of service and potentially have money to pay ransoms . In New Zealand , disaster management and recovery has tended to focus on responses to natural hazards rather than criminal activity . New Zealand does not have local cloud providers and expanding capacity is more difficult . Even if NZX won ’ t pay a ransom , this attack is “ advertising ” for the criminal gangs that may act as “ subcontactors ” to larger criminal organisations . The government ’ s aim will not be to catch the perpetrators in the short term but to share information on how to block the attacks . Normally the response is effective , but it can take some time to analyse details . At the same time , other attacks ( for example phishing to steal data ) may use the confusion caused by the DDoS attacks to target potential victims . Organisations should encourage people to update their security software and remain vigilant . In the future , as the internet of things ( IoT ) becomes more widespread , many billions of new devices will be connected to the internet . Security standards and forensic capability ( storing data to analyse attacks ) are not universal and there is a danger that these attacks will become more common and larger in scale . But defence is possible and both technical and policy approaches are getting better . Artificial intelligence tools for rapidly analysing attacks are the focus of . Support for governments in vulnerable areas is also increasing to enforce international agreements , clarify local law and share information between network providers . For example , Macau recently introduced a much tougher cyber security law which .
Bitcoin : the UK and US are clamping down on crypto trading – here ’ s why it ’ s not yet a big deal October 9 , 2020 2.56pm BST University of Liverpool Author Associate Professor in Financial Technology , University of Liverpool Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Where there ’ s a bit there ’ s a writ . The sale and promotion of derivatives of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies to amateur investors is in the UK by the financial regulator , the Financial Conduct Authority ( FCA ) . It is a further blow to the burgeoning cryptocurrency market , coming days after the US authorities of leading crypto derivatives exchange BitMex for operating without being US-registered and allegedly failing to follow anti-money-laundering rules . In view of from the University of Cambridge that most firms involved in crypto investments are still operating without a licence , other operators are potentially vulnerable to indictments too . It all sounds like bad news for anyone hoping that more investors will put money into cryptocurrencies . But on a closer inspection , I ’ m not so sure . Drops and oceans ? The FCA is preventing retail investors from buying and selling the likes of cryptocurrency futures and options , which people often use as a way of hedging their bets on an underlying asset . For example , you might buy an option to sell a certain number of bitcoin at today ’ s price if the price falls by 10 % , giving you an insurance policy in case the market moves against you . The it was introducing the ban from January 6 because amateur investors were at risk of “ sudden and unexpected losses ” . The reasoning is that these people often don ’ t understand the market , there is lots of “ market abuse and financial crime ” in the sector , cryptocurrencies are very volatile and they are hard to value . To stress , the ban is not being extended to professional traders or institutional firms like hedge funds , which have typically been allowed access to riskier financial products than the general population . It is about protecting might have been drawn to bitcoin thinking “ it may be the currency of the future ” , having “ heard sensational news coverage about the rise and fall ” . There are any number of splashy trading sites offering them quick and easy entry into this world , and YouTube influencers who to try complex trading . Some 1.9 million people – around 4 % of the adult population – own cryptocurrencies . Three-quarters have holdings worth less than £1,000 and would certainly qualify as retail investors . We don ’ t know what proportion of UK investors use crypto derivatives , but we do know that the worldwide trade in these financial products was fifth of the total in 2019 ( and growing rapidly in 2020 ) . Yet retail investors are probably not the main users of derivatives . Trading site earlier this year that maybe only a tenth of their retail investor spend was on this segment . And of the UK contingent using non-UK based exchanges , it ’ s easy enough to avoid FCA jurisdiction . The FCA says the ban could reduce annual losses and fees to investors by between £19 million and £101 million . The ban also doesn ’ t make much difference at a worldwide level . The UK crypto market is small beer compared to global cryptocurrency holdings , which ( £258 billion ) . You would not therefore have expected the FCA ban to have a material detrimental impact on the price of bitcoin or leading alternative coins like ethereum , and sure enough , . In fact , it was widely expected by industry observers and had arguably already been priced in . Volatility and excessive risk The fact that the price of bitcoin is very volatile has historically been the scourge of this sector , with many specialists that this prevents it from serving as a store of value and becoming a functional currency . You could argue that banning some derivatives trading has the potential to reduce this volatility . When people buy derivatives , they can be highly levered , meaning that they are borrowing to increase the size of their trade to make greater potential gains ( or losses ) . Many exchanges , typically in Asia , allow investors to borrow 15 times the size of the trade , while some offer over . When trades are leveraged , investors enter and exit the market more quickly , since their loss or gain is multiplied by the proportion they have borrowed . It ’ s this effect on the market price volatility . Yet bitcoin has lately been trading at an for volatility , so the ban may not achieve much in this respect . None of this is to say that the ban is meaningless . Derivatives make markets more efficient by allowing investors to hedge their bets , so even a partial ban in one major country has to be seen as a step backwards for cryptocurrencies . There is also a bigger danger for the industry that other leading global financial regulators such as the SEC in the US and BaFin in Germany may follow suit . This damage could be greatly aggravated if the US or other authorities were to indict other unregistered exchanges like BitMex . That could cause a liquidity crisis as investors withdrew their money en masse . Again , we will have to wait and see what happens . BitMex that around 30 % of customer funds have been withdrawn since the US issued charges , but insists it is open for “ business as usual ” . But as far as the UK ban is concerned , I would argue on balance that curtailing excessive risk-taking by amateur traders in a sector where trading vanilla cryptocurrencies is risky enough seems logical . I have met many “ retail investors ” in crypto whose depth of knowledge is refreshing , far exceeding that of financial institutions , but there will certainly be others who don ’ t understand their risks . To end on a positive note , part of the for the ban was that there was “ no reliable basis ” for valuing cryptocurrencies . It did not say there was no value in cryptocurrencies . That is a noticeable shift from what regulators might have said in the past , and is a sign that bitcoin is becoming more widely accepted .
Bitcoin ’ s rebound : 3 reasons this bubble may not burst December 3 , 2020 7.04pm GMT RMIT University Authors Professor of Economics , RMIT University Principal Research Fellow , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin is back . Three years after the bubble that inflated its value from US $ 5,000 to US $ 20,000 in less than three months burst in spectacular fashion , plunging more than 80 % , the cryptocurrency is again on the verge of a record high . In recent days it has been trading above US $ 19,000 , up from US $ 10,000 in October and US $ 5,900 in March . The price of Ethereum , the second-largest cryptocurrency by market value , has also surged over the past few months , up from less than US $ 250 in July to about US $ 600 . There are wild reports that by the end of 2021 Bitcoin could surge to , or . Cryptocurrency markets are notoriously volatile , so perhaps by the time you read this the value might have gone up . Or down again . So what is going on ? Is this another speculative bubble , fuelled by the “ greater fool theory ” ? Not necessarily . Unlike the 2017 bubble – when there was a lot of noise and excitement based on not very much actual mainstream adoption – there ’ s more substance to cryptocurrency price rises this time . Indicative of the change is the stance of JPMorgan Chase , the largest bank in the US . In October analysts at the bank ’ s global asset management arm tipped a “ ” in Bitcoin ’ s price . Clearly something has changed , because back in September 2017 the bank ’ s chief executive , Jamie Dimon , called the cryptocurrency a “ fraud ” and “ worse than tulip bulbs ” , and said he trading it for being “ stupid ” . Read more : Three basic trends can be discerned behind this change of heart . 1 . Digital money is coming First , there is the economic impact of COVID-19 and governments pumping massive amounts of money into economies . With investments such as property , savings and bonds less attractive , investors have been looking to assets with better prospects . Money has been flooding towards traditional “ safe-haven ” assets such as gold as well as stocks aligned with the digital economy . Among the most favoured stocks : Apple , Microsoft , Amazon , Etsy , PayPal and Zoom . Bitcoin offers aspects of both . Read more : The dramatic increase in online shopping and cashless payments due to COVID-19 has also accelerated interest in digital money . Central banks – including the US Federal Reserve , European Central Bank , Bank of Japan , Swiss National Bank and the Bank of England – are pushing ahead to ( known as “ central bank digital currencies ” or CBDCs ) . Leading the pack is the People ’ s Bank of China , which is a digital renminbi . Cryptocurrencies are also becoming more usable through so-called “ stablecoins ” with values pegged to central bank currencies ( the US dollar and the like ) as well as improved wallets making it . There are indications these trends will converge . China ’ s system will have some level of support for Ethereum applications . Paypal already allows US users to buy Bitcoin through their Paypal accounts , and will enable with Bitcoin next year . 2 . The technology is maturing Second , the technology that supports cryptocurrencies is maturing . One of the biggest problems for cryptocurrencies becoming mainstream is the sheer amount of energy-intensive computing processes required to make transactions secure ( which is important as you don ’ t want the same token spent twice ) . The carbon emissions from Bitcoin mining as more than that of a country such as Sri Lanka . Ethereum has embarked on a major technical upgrade ( called ) transitioning the blockchain to a “ ” mechanism that does away with energy-intensive computing processes . This should allay concerns of those holding back on environmental grounds and allow it to scale up . Whole new layers are also being developed that will allow blockchain technologies to be used in financial markets . The latest is decentralised finance ( known as ) , using blockchain to build completely digital and automated financial markets . These include and without traditional intermediaries such as stock markets or banks . This is only possible using blockchain infrastructure – and cryptocurrency . 3 . Institutions see its value Third – as illustrated by the changed stance at JPMorgan Chase – institutional investors are now embracing cryptocurrency . US cryptocurrency asset manager Grayscale Investments last month surpassed for institutional investors . This week global financial services company Guggenheim Partners ( managing more than US $ 275 billion in assets ) announced it could invest in Bitcoin through Grayscale . As Rick Rieder , chief executive of BlackRock , the world ’ s largest investment funds manager ( more than US $ 7.4 trillion in assets under management ) declared , “ ” . Should you buy Bitcoin ? So what does this mean for you as a potential retail investor ? Does buying cryptocurrency offer you a chance to make a fortune , like the guy said to have turned a US $ 3,000 investment in Bitcoin ? Not really . It ’ s still a gamble . The opportunity was earlier in the year when prices were much lower , and when the markets were filled with uncertainty and confusion . Now you just risk buying high and selling low . All cryptocurrencies remain volatile and speculative assets . Many people have been burned badly in the past by coming in at the top . Read more : Maybe this time is different , and the Bitcoin bubble won ’ t burst . But if so it will be because cryptocurrency is becoming staid economic infrastructure , not the latest get-rich meme . There are no guarantees . Bet only what you can afford to lose .
Unregulated currencies and finance are cool in theory - but who is responsible when it goes wrong ? Decentralised finance calls into question whether the crypto industry can ever be regulated December 11 , 2020 2.59pm GMT University of East London Author Senior Lecturer in Financial Law and Regulation , University of East London Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list As stock markets around the world struggle through the pandemic , Bitcoin has seen a steady rise in its price . The cryptocurrency is towards its all time high of US $ 20,000 ( £15,000 ) in 2017 . While this growth can be partially explained by investors being spooked by stock markets during the pandemic and looking for better investments , it is also influenced by the new , but evolving , decentralised finance market , also known as DeFi . DeFi allows people to engage in financial services such as borrowing , lending and investing but without intermediaries such as banks using blockchains and cryptocurrencies . Blockchains store digital records of transactions . Individual records , called “ blocks ” , are linked together in a single list , which creates the “ blockchain ” . Blockchains are used in DeFi to create “ smart contracts ” , which are automated , enforceable agreements that don ’ t need intermediaries , such as banks . The DeFi market is one to watch . It has grown to become worth – an increase of almost 700 % since the beginning of 2020 . DeFi has enormous potential in international trade by making payments more efficient . It could do away with the need to use intermediaries such as , which are financial institutions that offer services to a customer on behalf of another bank , usually in a foreign country . DeFi could also potentially help with the availability and equality of opportunities to access financial services . No accountability There is , however , a difficulty holding any particular person or entity accountable for any technological failure in this market . This can be anything from security failures , when the system is hacked and digital assets are stolen , to the collapse of the entire system . Read more : Unlike traditional banks , which can be sanctioned or shut down , there is nobody who can be held accountable or take responsibility when something goes wrong . This is because the applications in DeFi are built on decentralised systems , which distribute functions and power away from a central location or authority . Every node ( computer , IP , server ) connected to the system makes its own decision , and the final behaviour of the system is a collection of the decisions of . This is further complicated by the fact that DeFi transactions typically operate globally , and when regulatory standards are created for this sector in one country , platforms may gravitate to countries with less strict ones . There is also the challenge of global coordination , especially as countries are at varying stages of financial regulatory development . While advanced economies such as the UK and US have stronger regulatory frameworks , most in developing economies do not . DeFi platforms are also subject to and are growing platforms for . Is it even possible to regulate DeFi ? These factors raise the question of whether decentralised platforms can ever be regulated , or if the rules for the crypto industry set by the Financial Actions Task Force ( FATF ) , the global anti-money laundering watchdog , is robust enough . FATF only covers centralised systems or virtual assets service providers such as cryptocurrency exchanges . These are licensed businesses that allow customers to trade crypto or digital currencies for other assets , such as fiat currencies like the pound sterling , US dollars and euros . Such exchanges must adhere to FATF ’ s “ know your customer ” requirements , where the platforms are expected to know the parties transacting on them . FATF requirements do not cover financial activities occurring on decentralised systems . The idea of regulating centralised platforms and cryptocurrency exchanges – where people purchase crypto to use to transact on DeFi platforms , but leaving DeFi platforms unregulated – limits the overall effectiveness of the regulation of the whole crypto industry . Unless it is built into the source code of a decentralised application , it is difficult to see how regulation can be achieved . This would require cooperation with blockchain software developers . However , this may be placing too much power in their hands as they could manipulate the code to circumvent regulatory oversight at any time they choose to . Regulators may not want to do this . They could try to ban such activities instead . In the EU and the US , legislation has been proposed that could potentially ban the operation of DeFi . These include the Markets in Crypto-Assets ( MiCA ) Regulation and the proposed in December 2020 . Although it is not impossible to shut off a decentralised system , it is very difficult to achieve and it would require heavy reliance on government or regulatory authorities . It would also require getting access to IP addresses , cooperating with local internet service providers , identifying or tracing the physical location of people using the system and using the police to effectively shut down such platforms or activities . Locating and then prosecuting anyone within one jurisdiction would not be an easy task . Although this would and slow down the number of people using them for illegal means , it would be difficult to achieve on a global scale – which would threaten international standards . What is clear is that regulators need to acquire technological expertise and be willing to engage with a wider group of stakeholders , including software developers , to effectively regulate DeFi . It is worth noting that DeFi has been built mainly on the Ethereum blockchain , just as initial coin offerings ( ICOs ) were in 2017 . ICOs eventually fizzled out due to their . Whatever its future , DeFi is a fast-growing industry and deserves urgent regulatory attention .
Why is Bitcoin ’ s price at an high ? And how is its value determined ? January 6 , 2021 12.50am GMT RMIT University Authors Professor of Economics , RMIT University Researcher / PhD Candidate , RMIT Blockchain Innovation Hub / Digital Ethnography Research Centre , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Bitcoin close to its all-time high reached this month . Its price is now around US $ 34,000 — up about 77 % over the past month and 305 % over the past year . First launched in 2009 as a , Bitcoin was for a while used as digital money on the fringes of the economy . It has since become mainstream . Today , it ’ s used almost exclusively as a kind of “ ” . That is to say , a scarce digital asset . In response to the risk of economic collapse due to COVID , governments around the world have flooded global markets with money created by central banks , in order to boost spending and help save the economy . But increasing the supply of money erodes its value and leads people to look for inflation-resistant assets to hold . In this climate , Bitcoin has become a hedge against looming inflation and poor returns on other types of assets . What is Bitcoin ? Bitcoin , the world ’ s largest cryptocurrency by market capitalisation , has a current circulating supply of 18,590,300 bitcoins and a maximum supply of 21,000,000 . This limit is hard-coded into the Bitcoin protocol and can ’ t be changed . It creates artificial scarcity , which ensures the digital money increases in value over time . Whereas government-issued currencies such as the Australian dollar can have their supply increased at will by central banks , Bitcoin has a fixed supply that can ’ t be inflated by political decisions . Read more : Bitcoin is predominantly traded on online cryptocurrency exchanges , but can also be sent , received and stored in “ digital wallets ” on specific hardware or smartphone applications . But perhaps the most groundbreaking aspect of the Bitcoin network is that it draws on the work of and to exist as a blockchain-based digital currency . A public blockchain is an “ immutable ” database , which means the record of transaction history can ’ t be changed . A functional and decentralised digital currency Bitcoin is “ ” . In other words , it functions via a dispersed peer-to-peer network , rather than through a central authority such as a central bank . And it does this through the participation of Bitcoin “ ” . This is anyone who chooses to run software to validate Bitcoin transactions on the blockchain . Typically , these people are actively engaged with cryptocurrency . They are rewarded with bitcoins , more of which are created every ten minutes . But the reward paid to miners every four years . This gradual reduction was encoded into the network by creator Satoshi Nakamoto , who designed it this way to mimic the process of extracting actual gold — easier at first , but harder with time . Bitocoin miners today earn 6.25 bitcoins for every block mined , down from 50 bitcoins in the early years . This creates an incentive to get involved early , as scarcity increases with time . Because of this , the price is expected to rise to meet demand . But because future scarcity is known in advance ( predictable at four-year intervals ) , the halving events tend to already be priced in . Therefore , massive surges and falls in price typically reflect changing demand conditions , such as a growing number of new institutional investors . More and more public companies . But what function does Bitcoin that has people so invested ? Read more : Why does Bitcoin matter ? There are a few possible explanations as to why Bitcoin is now deemed significant by so many people . It ’ s a “ safe ” asset In the face of global uncertainty , buying bitcoins is a way for people to diversify their assets . Its market value can be compared to that of another go-to asset that shines in times of trouble : . Amid the turmoil of a global pandemic , an unconventional US presidential handover and geopolitical power shifts the world over , it ’ s possible more people view gold and Bitcoin as better alternatives to dollars . It ties into privacy-oriented ideologies Bitcoin ( and cryptocurrency in general ) is not politically and ideologically neutral . It was born of the internet era , one plagued with for privacy . Bitcoin ’ s intellectual and ideological origins are in the “ cypherpunk ” movement of the 1990s and early 2000s . Records of online forums show it was advocated for as an anonymous digital currency that allowed people to interact online without being tracked by governments or corporations , offering an alternative for anyone who distrusts the Federal central banking system . Perhaps the overt rise of digital surveillance in response to the COVID pandemic has further stoked fears about and security — again piquing the public ’ s interest in Bitcoin ’ s potential . Why is Bitcoin booming ? Bitcoin ’ s recent boom in value comes down to a combination of three factors : ideology , social sentiment and hope . But although these are variable factors , this doesn ’ t discredit the significance of the , interest in the technology as it matures and the influence of institutional investors in cryptocurrency , including Bitcoin . Bitcoin is in an upward market trend , also known as “ bull market ” territory . It was designed to increase in value over time through the rules Nakamoto wrote into its software code — which Bitcoin ’ s most outspoken advocates , known as “ ” , vehemently defend . Imagining new futures From a larger frame of reference , decentralised cryptocurrencies allow new ways to a central arbiter . And decentralised blockchain-based networks don ’ t just enable digital money . Similar to ordinary smartphone apps , software developers around the world are building decentralised applications ( ) on top of Bitcoin and other blockchain protocols . They have introduced other cryptocurrencies , such as , which are also open platforms for the public . Other DApps include decentralised financial ( DeFi ) tools for prediction markets , cryptocurrency borrowing and lending , investing and crowd-funding . Nakamoto ’ s audacious experiment in digital currency is working as intended . And what really deserves attention now is what this means for our digital , physical and social futures . Read more :
Bitcoin : why the price has exploded – and where it goes from here January 7 , 2021 2.58pm GMT University of Reading Author Associate Professor of Finance , ICMA Centre , Henley Business School , University of Reading Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list B is for blast-off ( but also bubble ) . Bitcoin achieved a remarkable rise in 2020 in spite of many things that would normally make investors wary , including US-China tensions , Brexit and , of course , an international pandemic . on the daily charts of US $ 4,748 ( £3,490 ) in the middle of March as pandemic fears took hold , bitcoin rose to just below US $ 30,000 by the end of the year . Since then it has climbed to all-time highs above US $ 38,000 , making headlines day after day and driving up the prices of other cryptocurrencies at the same time . So what has driven this huge price appreciation and is it different to the ? Bitcoin/US $ price 2016-21 One reason for the massive price rise is that there has been a big influx of investors from such as pension schemes , university endowment funds and investment trusts . This was not the case during the last bull market in 2017 , in which the bitcoin price rose about 20-fold to almost US $ 20,000 , only to slide back to the low US $ 3,000s a year later . In 2017 , the cryptocurrency ecosystem was dominated by individual retail investors , many of whom were attracted to bitcoin ’ s scarcity and the fact that it stood outside the global financial system . The 2017 bull market had all the signs of a classic financial bubble and investors who were buying in “ fear of missing out ” ( FOMO ) . The move mainstream This time , big names such as billionaire investor and insurance giant have invested heavily , while even former naysayers like JP Morgan now a bright future . This all helps to increase trust in the cryptocurrency and indicates that it is becoming more mainstream . Bitcoin has also been backed by a few large consumer-facing payment names . customers to buy , hold and sell bitcoin directly from their PayPal accounts . Rival digital payment firm in November that more of its Cash App users are buying the digital currency , and buying more on average than before . The accepting bitcoin as a form of payment is growing rapidly . Possibly most importantly , Visa has to bitcoin . In October a handful of bitcoin-related credit and debit cards with leading crypto exchange Coinbase . With more and more ways of using bitcoin , it should mean that more people will want to hold it . Bitcoin has also become much more mature since the days when it was used mainly as a method to purchase drugs on the dark web . Bitcoin digital wallets , keys and exchanges are easier to access and there is a lot more reliable information out there than before . The introduction of financial products such as bitcoin futures and options , as well as , has allowed investors who might otherwise have been fearful of volatility to get involved . Bitcoin futures mean that investors can speculate on falling prices by “ going short ” on the cryptocurrency . Nobel laureate Robert Shiller the 2017 bubble could have been linked to the fact that there were no bitcoin futures at the time . The inflation hedge Besides all this mainstream enthusiasm , the carnage brought by COVID-19 has led to huge stimulus packages from governments around the globe and many central banks printing more money . This could drive up inflation , which in turn lowers people ’ s purchasing power . Indeed the US Federal Reserve last year signalled it would be slightly more tolerant of rising prices its 2 % inflation target . In the face of this threat , investments like bitcoin are being consider a store of value . The maximum number of bitcoin that will ever exist is set at 21 million ( unless the protocol changes ) , and about 18.5 million in circulation . The supply of new coins is also slowing down because the reward that bitcoin miners receive for verifying transactions on the blockchain – it fell from BTC12.5 to BTC6.25 last May . This scarcity is comparable to that of precious metals . Even central banks are embracing cryptocurrencies . Russia , China , Canada , the EU and many others are either already working on ( CBDCs ) for their countries or publishing white papers detailing their intentions to do so . This is an obvious sign that the powers that be in the old financial world are seeing cryptocurrencies as the future . Meanwhile , the that retail banks can carry out payments with stablecoins , which are cryptocurrencies pegged to traditional currencies . Where next It therefore seems that the recent bitcoin price appreciation may have more substance than in 2017 . But not everyone agrees . Chief economist and strategist at Rosenberg Research and Associates , , believes bitcoin is in a bubble and investors don ’ t understand how it works . Rosenberg is well placed to comment on bubbles since he is known for identifying the US housing market bubble that led to the global financial crisis of 2008-09 . He believes investors don ’ t understand how bitcoin works and it is in a classic , follow-the-herd bubble ( though he has he is no expert on the cryptocurrency himself ) . Meanwhile , large volatility in the price is still a major issue , which will still worry some institutional investors . So what to believe ? There are plenty of very bullish forecasts for the bitcoin price in 2021 . Tyler and Cameron Winklevoss , the founders of leading crypto exchange Gemini , will eventually hit US $ 500,000 per coin , while a suggests a price of US $ 318,000 by December 2021 . Obviously these parties have “ skin in the game ” and these numbers may be too optimistic . However , in March 2020 the prospect of bitcoin reaching US $ 30,000 seemed impossible . Wherever the price goes from here , the fortunes of the leading cryptocurrency are clearly going to be one of the world ’ s biggest financial stories in the year ahead .
Welcome to web 3.0 . Ethereum : what is it and why has the price gone parabolic ? January 21 , 2021 7.41pm GMT University College Dublin Authors Lecturer/Assistant Professor in Management Information Systems , University College Dublin Professor of Information & Organisation , University College Dublin Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list The price of the world ’ s second largest cryptocurrency , ether , hit a of US $ 1,440 ( £1,050 ) on January 19 . This breached a previous high set three years ago and gave ether a total value ( market capitalisation ) of US $ 160 billion , although it has to around US $ 140 billion . Ether , which runs on a technology system known as the ethereum blockchain , is worth over ten times the price it was when it bottomed during the COVID market panic of March 2020 . And the cryptocurrency is still only five years old . In part , this remarkable rise in the value is due to into all the leading cryptocurrencies , which are now seen as relatively safe store-of-value assets and a good speculative investment . Ether/US $ price But ether ’ s price rise has even outstripped that of the number one cryptocurrency , bitcoin , which “ only ” had a seven-fold increase since March . Ether has outperformed partly due to several improvements and new features being rolled out over the next few months . So what are ether and ethereum and why is this cryptocurrency now corporate giants such as Starbucks and AstraZeneca ? Ether and bitcoin Blockchains are online ledgers that keep permanent tamper-proof records of information . These records are continually verified by a network of computer nodes similar to servers , which are not centrally controlled by anyone . Ether is just one of over 8,000 cryptocurrencies that use some form of this technology , which was invented by the anonymous “ Satoshi Nakamoto ” when over a decade ago . The ethereum blockchain was in 2013 by Vitalik Buterin , a 19-year old prodigy who was born in Russia but mostly grew up in Canada . After crowdfunding and development in 2014 , the platform was launched in July 2015 . As with the bitcoin blockchain , each ethereum transaction is confirmed when the nodes on the network reach a consensus that it took place – these verifiers are rewarded in ether for their work , in a process known as mining . But the bitcoin blockchain is confined to enabling digital , decentralised money – meaning money that is not issued from any central institution unlike , say , dollars . Ethereum ’ s blockchain is categorically different in that it can host both other digital tokens or coins , and decentralised applications . Decentralised applications or “ dapps ” are open-source programs developed by communities of coders not attached to any company . Any changes to the software are voted on by the community using a consensus mechanism . Perhaps the best known applications running on the ethereum blockchain are “ smart contracts ” , which are programs that automatically execute all or parts of an agreement when certain conditions are met . For instance , a smart contract could automatically reimburse a customer if , say , a flight was delayed more than a prescribed amount of time . Many of the dapp communities are also operating what is known as or DAOs . These are essentially alternatives to companies and seen by many as the building blocks of the next phase of the internet or “ ” . A good example is the burgeoning trading exchange . Ethereum has evolved and developed since its launch six years ago . In 2016 , a set of smart contracts known as “ The DAO ” US $ 150 million in a crowdsale but was quickly exploited by a hacker who siphoned off one- third of the funds . However , since then , the ethereum ecosystem has matured considerably . While hacks and scams remain common , the overall level of professionalism appears to have improved dramatically . Why the price explosion Financial interest in ether tends to follow in the wake of bitcoin rallies because it is the second-largest cryptocurrency and , as such , quickly draws the attention of the novice investor . All the same , there are other factors behind its recent rally . The first is the pace of innovation on the platform . Most activity in the cryptocurrency space happens on ethereum . In 2020 , we saw the emergence of . DeFi is analogous to the mainstream financial world , but with the middleman banks cut out . Users can borrow , trade , lend and invest through autonomous smart contracts via protocols like , and . It sounds like science fiction , but this is no hypothetical market – approximately is locked into various DeFi projects right now . Importantly , DeFi allows users to generate income on their cryptocurrency holdings , especially their ether tokens . The second factor behind the ether surge is the launch of . This upgrade addresses major concerns impacting the current version of ethereum . In particular , it will – especially useful in DeFi trading , where each transaction can end up costing the equivalent of tens of US dollars . Ethereum 2.0 will also eliminate the environmentally wasteful mining currently required to make the ethereum blockchain function ( the same is true of many other cryptocurrencies , including bitcoin ) . Within the year , ethereum should be able to drop the need for vast industrial mining warehouses that consume huge amounts of energy . Instead , transactions will be validated using a different system known as “ ” . The sense that ethereum addresses problems like these quickly rather than letting them sit could prove a major differential from the sometimes sluggish and conservative pace of the bitcoin development culture . A final factor is the launch of trading on February 8 . This means that traders will be able to speculate on what ether will be worth at a given date in the future for the first time – a hallmark of any mature financial asset . Some the recent bitcoin rally has been fuelled by traditional investment firms , and the launch of ethereum futures is often touted as opening the doors for the same price action . However , as every seasoned cryptocurrency user knows , both currencies are extremely volatile and are as liable to crash by extremes as rise by them . Bitcoin ’ s 85 % in the year after the last bull market in 2017 , while by 95 % at one stage from its previous high of US $ 1,428 . Whatever the valuation , the future of ethereum as a platform looks bright . Its challenge is ultimately external : projects such as and , created by individuals who helped launch ethereum itself , are attempting to steal ethereum ’ s crown . But as bitcoin has shown , first-mover advantage matters in cryptocurrency , and despite bitcoin ’ s relative lack of features it is unlikely to be moved from its dominant position for some time . The same is most likely true for the foreseeable future with ethereum .
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in border closures and an increased desire to localize production and use supply chains that are close to home . How online markets are helping local stores survive February 1 , 2021 3.16pm GMT Université du Québec à Chicoutimi ( UQAC ) Authors Professeure adjointe en marketing , responsable du LaboNFC , Université du Québec à Chicoutimi ( UQAC ) Associate professor , Université du Québec à Chicoutimi ( UQAC ) Associate professor , Université du Québec à Chicoutimi ( UQAC ) Professeur titulaire , Université du Québec à Chicoutimi ( UQAC ) Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA-FR . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Languages Retail giants like Amazon are blurring the boundaries of consumption . But thanks to platforms that link online consumption to local interests , , a trend fuelled by the COVID-19 pandemic , is now giving rise to a new phenomenon known as “ . ” While the pandemic has resulted in border closures and an increased desire to localize production and use supply chains that are close to home , large platforms like Amazon have been criticized for cashing in on the economic misfortune for small local businesses brought about by the crisis . In Québec , this spawned the creation of new platforms to sell local goods , such as , , and , a site for purchasing local goods in the province ’ s Lac St-Jean region . A local e-commerce platform for shopping malls also sprung up , , a rideshare co-operative platform that works with taxi companies and gives drivers more control over the business . These new companies are bringing back meaning to consumption and production . And in these times of transition , aren ’ t we all looking for ways to add more meaning to our lives ? The era of the consumer-supplier Whether you want to carpool using the Eva platform , trade goods with someone on Kijiji , participate in a crowdfunding effort or do business on a site like , it ’ s the consumer-supplier concept that ’ s making this transition possible . Consumption methods have become increasingly divorced from production since the beginning of the 20th century . Consumers have become strictly buyers . However , new concepts like collaborative consumption , the sharing economy and crowd-based capitalism are now mixing the modes of consumption and production . The passive consumer is being replaced by an active consumer who takes on the role of supplier , volunteer or even partner . For example , by using NousRire ( a play on the French “ nourir ” , “ to feed ” ) , a Québec-based bulk-purchasing group for eco-responsible food sites , clients become both suppliers and volunteers . In other words , they are partners in the organization . Similar changes are taking place in the world of large-scale distribution . Examples include IKEA ’ s , and ( a contraction of shopping and swapping ) , a service that allows shoppers to donate used clothing in boxes located in the British retailer ’ s stores . The term “ ” has been used to describe this new trend of consumers who , thanks to these different platforms and applications , are also serving as suppliers . The same concept applies to Facebook Marketplace , Kijiji , InstaCart and VarageSale . Not just about saving money What ’ s motivating consumers to adopt these new practices ? While buyers and suppliers have both financial and utilitarian goals , suppliers in this model can also be motivated by factors that go beyond pure financial gain . Those motivations may include financial constraints ( debt , liquidity problems ) , a desire to socialize with others , to contribute to society or simple altruism . In addition to the aforementioned trading platforms , sites offer individuals training and advice resources . For outsourcing tasks , people can turn to Amazon ’ s . In health care , a transition towards digital care is underway that is making it possible to better distribute resources and allows people to offer advice and services through online forums , groups or patient communities . Read more : Democratizing markets The financial sector has also become more democratic . Crowd-funding platforms such as Ulule make it possible for individuals to donate or invest in projects carried out by other parties , while platforms make investing in financial markets more of a democratic process . These platforms allow individuals to revitalize local economies by redirecting capital toward areas that are typically neglected by public or private investment . Cryptocurrency and blockchain are also interesting examples . Thousands of cryptocurrency systems like Bitcoin are operating right now that involve cryptocurrency miners replacing central banks . Facebook ’ s suggests that there is a “ total digital ecosystem ” emerging : a dematerialized and demonetized society entirely centred on individuals . Read more : In 2016 , India even . The policy had an impact on practices specific to emerging countries , including cash on delivery , which was transformed into payment on delivery . It ’ s hard to say if this is good news or bad . On one hand , collaborative transactions , which are often informal , are getting easier to perform . On the other , they are totally traceable and taxable . A controversial economy The collaborative economy is probably the most visible , well-documented and disruptive example of the ongoing marketplace transformation . Hotel owners complain about Airbnb and taxi businesses about Uber because , in principle , any individual can now supply lodging or transport for a fee . These debates in Québec that are more accommodating to the new players . Those laws have , in turn , This change has allowed authorities to transfer some of the responsibility for public services to the private sector . In public transportation , the availability of carpooling services could compensate for shortages in public transit . Citizens appreciate these practices because they satisfy their needs , maximize the use of dormant resources , provide better access to resources for the poor and reduce unemployment . However , it is still unclear whether , by turning suppliers into “ entrepreneurs , ” these platforms are reinventing working conditions or damaging them given the many issues facing precarious workers . Read more : An illusion of power ? It ’ s essential to understand the impact that the algorithms used by these platforms are having on governance , questions of inclusion and user rights . The exponential amount of data generated by the platforms has increased large companies ’ ability to identify the needs of their users quickly , and evaluate their payment capabilities precisely . These capacities could lead to discriminatory practices . In addition , platforms are notoriously opaque about their pricing practices : they often customize and adjust prices in real time for each user . Finally , since the collaborative economy is monopolized by technological giants , it ’ s less likely that smaller platforms will emerge , let alone survive . In short , by becoming a supplier — either as an entrepreneur or self-employed worker or through a flexible work schedule — consumers may only be gaining an illusion of power when they ’ re still in the service of mega-platforms . Will digital localism be able to make its place in this world ? Will platforms born during the COVID-19 pandemic in a bid to support local economies have any chance of surviving in the longer term ? According to a case study of , the only way smaller platforms can hope to survive is by addressing needs that are not being met by the giants : leveraging a particular customer segment , type of partner , value proposition or their cost structure and revenue stream . Nonetheless , recent developments in digital technologies are clearly giving individuals more ways to contribute . This digital transition , already well underway , has accelerated during the COVID-19 pandemic and is unlikely to stop soon . This article was originally published in
After GameStop , the rise of Dogecoin shows us how memes can move markets February 3 , 2021 2.35am GMT RMIT University Authors Professor of Economics , RMIT University Senior Research Fellow and Co-Director , RMIT Blockchain Innovation Hub , RMIT University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a strategic partner of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list One of the most difficult problems in finance right now is figuring out the fundamental economic value of cryptocurrencies . And the past week has complicated this further . For many cryptocurrency investors , the value of Bitcoin is based on the fact it is artificially scarce . A hard cap on “ ” new coins means there will only ever be 21 million Bitcoin in existence . And unlike national currencies such as the Australian dollar , the rate of release for new Bitcoin is slowing down over time . Dogecoin , a cryptocurrency that takes its name and logo from that was popular several years ago , doesn ’ t have a cap . Launched in 2013 , there are now 100 billion Dogecoin in existence , with as many as five billion new coins minted each year . But how can a currency with a seemingly unlimited supply have any value at all ? And why did Dogecoin ’ s price suddenly surge in 24 hours on January 29 ? At the time of publication , the “ memecoin ” was A $ 5.6 billion on the stockmarket . A long-running joke brought to life Dogecoin is one of the original “ altcoins ” : released in the few years after the pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto first released Bitcoin into the wild . From a technical perspective , Dogecoin isn ’ t very innovative . Like many early altcoins , it ’ s based on the original source code of Bitcoin . Or more technically , it ’ s based on , which in turn was based on Bitcoin — but with some small modifications such as faster transactions and the removal of the supply cap . But Dogecoin is much more interesting when seen through a cultural lens . Read more : The cryptocurrency was created by software engineers Billy Markus and Jackson Palmer — although Palmer , an Australian , has since walked away from the project . They branded it with the Doge meme partly to be funny , but also to distance it from as a currency for illicit transactions . Now , Dogecoin has outlasted almost all the early derivative altcoins and has a thriving community of investors . In 2014 , Dogecoin holders the Jamaican Bobsled Team . , they sponsored a NASCAR driver . , the world ’ s richest man , is among the cryptocurrency ’ s high-profile advocates . In December last year , a tweet from Musk sent Dogecoin ’ s . Collectivism leads to creativity proclaim Dogecoin ’ s value as a new global currency . Musk himself shared a similar sentiment a few days ago . Speaking , he said : Dogecoin was made as a joke to make fun of cryptocurrencies , but fate loves irony . The most ironic outcome would be that Dogecoin becomes the currency of Earth in the future . But Dogecoin is best thought of as a cultural product , rather than a financial asset . The reality is few cryptocurrency users hold it as a serious investment or to use in regular transactions . Instead , to own Dogecoin is to participate in a culture . People buy it because it ’ s fun to have , is inherently amusing and comes with a welcoming and enjoyable community experience . If we start thinking of the cryptocurrency as a cultural product , last week ’ s sudden jump in Dogecoin ’ s price makes sense . The boost came just after a meme-centric community the share price of videogame retailer GameStop from US $ 20 to US $ 350 in mere days . This swarm behaviour was unlike anything seen before — and it frightened global financial markets . One particularly interesting aspect of the Reddit forum — which coordinated the attack on the hedge fund that had effectively bet on GameStop ’ s share price falling — was how many users were having fun . It ’ s no surprise activity surrounding Dogecoin has a similar vibe ; it was designed to be fun right from the start . Doge : icon of the internet Some people participate in financial markets as a form of consumption — meaning for entertainment , leisure and to experience community — just as much as they do for investment . Cultural assets such as Dogecoin are hard to systematically value when compared to financial assets , a bit like how we don ’ t have a fundamental theorem for pricing art . Almost by definition , the demand for a memecoin will fluctuate as wildly as internet culture itself does , turning cultural bubbles into financial bubbles . RMIT professor and crypto-ethnographer Ellie Rennie calls these “ ” . By inspecting Dogecoin closely , we can learn a lot about the interplay of technology , culture and economics . Moreover , cryptocurrencies are extraordinarily diverse . Some are built for small payments or to be resilient holders of value . Others protect financial privacy or act as an internal token to manage smart contracts , supply chains or electricity networks . Under the hood , Bitcoin and Dogecoin look almost exactly the same . Their code differs in only a few parameters . But their economic functions are almost entirely opposite . Bitcoin is a kind of “ ” adopted as a secure hedge against political and economic uncertainty . Dogecoin , on the other hand , is a meme people add to their digital wallet because they think it ’ s funny . But in an open digital economy , memes move markets .
Bitcoin : why a wave of huge companies like Tesla rushing to invest could derail the stock market February 11 , 2021 4.26pm GMT University of Liverpool Author Associate Professor in Financial Technology , University of Liverpool Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list ‘ It ’ s a one-way bet. ’ After it has invested US $ 1.5 billion in bitcoin and expects to start accepting the cryptocurrency as a payment for its electric vehicles in the near future , the bitcoin price went soaring . It went from around US $ 39,400 to an all-time high of over US $ 48,000 in less than 24 hours . The up by over 50 % in the first six weeks of 2021 . Led by Elon Musk , Tesla ’ s investment is obviously in profit already : depending on the exact day of the purchase , it is likely to be worth over US $ 2 billion , pointing to a paper profit of over US $ 500 million . To put that in context , when the electric car-maker made its first ever in 2020 , it was just over US $ 700 million . The bitcoin price Tesla ’ s move into bitcoin comes on the back of a wave of institutional money invested in the leading cryptocurrency in recent months , plus numerous other companies putting it into their . With the world ’ s also saying it might buy and hold other digital assets “ from time to time or long term ” , it must be tempting for other major companies to do likewise . Since the Tesla announcement , Twitter finance director Ned Segal that his company is considering such a move , while a from the Royal Bank of Canada has made a case for why it would benefit Apple . The prospect of a bluechip invasion into bitcoin has caused much excitement among cryptocurrency investors . But if Tesla does trigger such a goldrush , there will also be some unsettling consequences . Volatility spillover Tesla justified this material change in the way it manages its treasury reserves by stating that investing in bitcoin will “ provide us with more flexibility to further diversify and maximise returns on our cash ” . Corporate treasurers have always used the money markets to invest surplus cash to eke out small yields , and it is harder than it used to be in the current long-term low interest rate environment . All the same , this is very different to standard money management . Bitcoin is a highly volatile asset that you would not typically associate with the cash reserves on the balance sheet of a listed company worth close to a trillion US dollars . As recently as March 2020 , the price dipped below US $ 4,000 . Even in 2021 , the price fell more than 30 % before its most recent surge . Tesla has put almost 8 % of its reserves into the cryptocurrency . If , , , and were to do the same , this would translate into almost another US $ 7 billion investment . This is less than of the bitcoin market , but the signal that it would send to other companies and retail investors would likely trigger a bull run that would make the current market look comparably stable . Some crypto analysts are already predicting that the price will or before 2021 is out . Such a rise would drive up the value of the bitcoin on corporate balance sheets to multiples of what it was at the time of investment . Tesla ’ s 8 % allocation may already have gone up to 12 % of the value of its reserves , for instance . And if it follows through on a potential plan to keep any bitcoins it receives for electric cars instead of converting them into dollars , that percentage could rise all the faster . The problem is the potential effect on company share prices . Tesla ’ s share price on the news of the bitcoin investment , though it has since fallen by 5 % . But a longer term example is Canadian tech company Microstrategy . Its share price has in value in the past year on the back of a heavy investment into bitcoin , but is also down by almost a quarter in the days since the Tesla announcement . Writ large , this could make stock markets far choppier in future – and vulnerable to a nosedive when the bitcoin bull market ends . It would be easy to imagine that this could prompt a wider wave of selling as investors sought to cover their loss-making positions , which could be very dangerous for financial stability . What the regulators will do Global regulators will no doubt be concerned about a potential volatility spillover from digital asset prices into traditional capital markets . They may not permit what could quickly amount to effective proxy approval by the back door for companies holding large proportions of a volatile asset on their balance sheets . We have already seen the likes of European Central Bank president and new US Treasury secretary calling for more bitcoin regulation in recent weeks . The view from US regulator the SEC will be extremely important , and it is difficult to predict the response of newly appointed head , who is himself a crypto expert . We may see anything from a wait-and-see approach through to a ban on listed companies holding any bitcoin-like assets . But I would expect that if the price of bitcoin continues towards US $ 100,000 , there may be a regulatory restriction on the reserve percentage that listed companies can hold in digital assets . This would be similar to the companies can not buy back more than 25 % of the average daily volume of their own stock . Such a rule would force companies to sell bitcoin if a price increase meant their holdings broke the maximum level , creating a form of sell pressure that the crypto market has not seen before . For now , however , bitcoin continues to look like a “ buy ” asset on the back of the Tesla announcement . The crypto community will be watching to see whether other major companies follow suit , and whether Tesla has the conviction to stay invested when its next quarterly announcement comes around . But if this trend continues , make no mistake that a reckoning will be coming over the prospect of the heady volatility of the crypto market going mainstream . Watch this space .
Everydays : The First 5000 Days . A token sale : Christie ’ s to auction its first artwork February 24 , 2021 7.08pm GMT University of Canberra Author Assistant Professor in Digital Arts and Humanities , University of Canberra Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Since May 2007 , US-based digital artist Mike Winkelmann ( who goes by the name ) has posted a new artwork online every day . He posted the 5,000th one in January , and has now packaged them into an enormous digital collage titled Everydays : The First 5000 Days , which will be by Christie ’ s on February 25 . The work will be sold in purely digital form , as a 21,069 × 21,069-pixel JPEG file and a “ non-fungible token ” or NFT . NFTs use blockchain technology to give the successful bidder unquestioned ownership of the work . Read more : NFT artworks are becoming a serious business . Last year , Beeple on an NFT auction . But the of a global blue-chip auction house like Christie ’ s into this domain may mark a new stage for blockchain technology , as a widespread tool for both maintenance and transformation of digital art markets . Not as new as it seems Christie ’ s claims the sale of Everydays is the first time a major auction house has offered a purely digital artwork . Christie ’ s has sold digital works before , including videos ( such as Ryan Trecartin ’ s in 2013 ) and software-based installations ( such as teamLab ’ s in 2018 ) . But these were accompanied by physical trappings , such as certificates of authenticity or fancy hard drives to house the digital files . This time , however , it ’ s simply . What are NFTs ? NFTs support claims to an artwork ’ s value . While the JPEG file of Everydays may be copied , the collector ’ s blockchain-based record of ownership will allow them to display the work ( and to resell it ) on a number of online platforms . Christie ’ s has teamed up with one such platform , , for the deal . Makersplace uses an open standard smart contract for its NFTs , which means the work can be sold in many other places in the the increasingly complex . NFTs are useful in the digital art market because they enable claims to authenticity and scarcity , despite the ease with which digital works can ordinarily be copied . Artists and galleries have tried to create scarcity via and to assure authenticity with certificates , but NFTs seek to automate this process . NFTs record ownership on a blockchain , which is a decentralised alternative to a central database . Built through cryptography and peer-to-peer networks , blockchains are resistant to tampering and hacking , which makes them useful for storing important records . Vince Tabora from US tech website has written an accessible of how blockchain is different from older ways of storing and organising data . Why blockchain ? Ever since blockchains were described in the published by pseudonymous Bitcoin inventor Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 , the idea of a “ ” way to keep secure public records has evolved into a so-called “ ” , fuelling a considerable amount of hype . Simultaneously , voices have emerged to encourage more nuanced and critical engagement with blockchain ’ s possibilities and limitations . and are two key publications exploring these tensions across varied cultural domains . Carnegie Mellon Researchers have potential use-cases for the art industry , including securing artwork provenance ( see ) or enabling secure forms of fractional ownership ( see ) . And Christie ’ s is no stranger to new technology . The company has hosted regular since 2018 ( the inaugural topic being blockchain ) . In 2018 , Christie ’ s proudly announced it was “ the first auction house to offer a work of art created by an algorithm ” , with the sale of the AI-generated painting for more than 40 times its estimate . So by selling Everydays as “ the first purely digital work ” to be offered by a major auction house , Christie ’ s is reinforcing its self-described “ position at the forefront of innovation in the art world ” . Virtual trading cards and CryptoKitties At the same time , Christie ’ s upcoming auction is only the tip of the NFT-collecting iceberg . Industry publication estimates the total value of the NFT market to be US $ 250 million . Platforms such as , and host a rapidly expanding range of digital collectibles to buy and sell by a growing community of collectors . Beyond art , digital collectibles include virtual trading cards , artefacts and attire for virtual gaming worlds . They also underpin games such as , in which NFTs serve to secure the “ unique genome ” of each kitty in the game . These examples reflect the uptake of NFTs across different digital subcultures , providing collectors with claims to uniqueness that were previously considered impossible in the online realm . Blockchain for artists Artists and other creative practitioners may also benefit from blockchain-backed systems . Researchers at RMIT published a on how blockchain infrastructures could help Australia ’ s creative economy in 2019 . They note how blockchains could support artists in trading , creating contracts , getting their work discovered , sharing resources – and making money to support their livelihoods . Artists themselves are also searching for new ways to use blockchain and other “ distributed ledger ” technologies . Over the past decade , in London has worked with artists to explore the possibilities and limitations , partnering most recently with Goethe Institute and Serpentine Galleries for . Other notable projects include , which showcases how artists have a stake in this technological shift , and , and , which examine how new tools for organisation can challenge the value systems of the traditional art market , rather than further solidify them . Blockchain futures This reexamination of art in light of blockchain has also been happening in Australia . In 2019 , and I worked with the community to curate a project called , which brought together local artists , designers and hackers to examine how blockchain could affect the arts , culture and heritage in the Asia-Pacific . More recently , and I co-curated an event called , which was co-presented by several universities , galleries and arts organisations . We presented a program of talks , performances and artworks that considered how blockchain ’ s uprooting of legacy economic systems and narratives opens space to imagine different ways to value , design and organise our creative and cultural practices . At this stage it ’ s hard to say exactly what blockchain will mean for art . For now , perhaps we should let Beeple have the : bruh , i just learned wtf an NFT is like two weeks ago , not gon na act like i have a ton of intelligent shit to say here . this crypto space seems super interesting though and i see a ton of potential to do some weird shit nobody has done yet… Read more : was co-presented by ( University of Canberra ) , ( Western Sydney University ) , ( Australian National University ) , and ( RMIT University ) , and , with the support of the and . was co-presented with bitfwd ventures and community , with the generous support of the University of Canberra , ACT Government , the Australian National University , DAOStack and Sigma Prime .
Bitcoin : this year I stand to make $ 200 million more than Elon Musk March 3 , 2021 7.06pm GMT University of Canberra Author Senior Lecturer , Canberra School of Politics , Economics and Society , University of Canberra Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Elon Musk , the chief executive of Tesla , recently announced his company had bought US $ 1.5 billion ( almost A $ 2 billion ) of . The announcement led to a flurry of enthusiasm and a quick surge in price for the controversial . This price bump has been good news for Musk in the short term . At one point , Tesla ’ s Bitcoin investment had gained . But can the enthusiasm be sustained ? I think there is a good chance that over the next year the price of Bitcoin will drop towards its fundamental value , which is nothing . If Bitcoin were to lose half its present value — which is not unlikely , given its extremely volatile past behaviour — Tesla will lose around A $ 1 billion . As Elon Musk owns about a fifth of Tesla , he would then be down A $ 200 million . In contrast , I own no Bitcoin so I will lose nothing , which means I will have done A $ 200 million better than Musk . Why Musk ’ s decision is a bad thing Musk is not doing Tesla ’ s shareholders any favours . If they wanted to be exposed to the rise and fall of Bitcoin they could just buy some themselves . Now they have no choice ; if they want to invest in Tesla electric vehicles , they are also vulnerable to the vagaries of Bitcoin . The usual justification for making investments more diverse is that it can reduce risk . But buying the extremely volatile Bitcoin will make Tesla ’ s earnings even more uncertain . Nor is Musk doing his fans any favours . As a “ rock star CEO ” with more than 40 million followers on Twitter , his musings are widely reported in other media . By publicly endorsing Bitcoin , Musk may lead some of his fans to invest in this highly risky speculative asset . They may not be as well placed as a multibillionaire to absorb any losses on their investment . ( To be fair , Musk has warned them . ) Nor is he doing the inhabitants of this planet any favours . The generation of Bitcoins ( known as “ mining ” ) uses vast amounts of energy to power specialised computers solving complex but useless mathematical problems . Estimates vary as to how much energy they waste . Some studies suggest Bitcoin production uses more electricity than the whole of , , , or . But even the lower estimates are that it results in more carbon emissions than . And if Bitcoin becomes more popular this will only increase . What will the Bitcoin price do ? How likely is it that Bitcoin could lose half its value within a year ? Well , it has form . After it peaked at A $ 24,000 in December 2017 , it dropped to A $ 10,000 by February 2018 . After recovering to A $ 16,000 in July 2019 , it dropped to A $ 8,000 by March 2020 . Bitcoin may be the purest ever example of a speculative . It follows in the footsteps of famous bubbles such as the South Sea bubble , the , gold around 1980 , the , and the US housing market before the global financial crisis of 2008 . Read more : But past bubbles have had more going for them . Houses provide shelter . Gold has industrial uses and jewellery can be made from it . The South Sea Company and millennial tech stocks at least promised streams of future dividends . Even tulips can be admired for their beauty . Bitcoin offers no return at all unless you can resell it to a “ ” . It is a — a speculation based on nothing . The limits of Bitcoin Bitcoin ’ s backers often say its value stems from the fact that supply is limited . This is complicated by the fact dissident users have created “ ” in the past , leading to schismatic bitcoins such as . But even if we accept the limit at face value , there is no limit on the creation of other cryptocurrencies . There are literally thousands of them already , such as Litecoin , Tether and . In any case , just because something is in limited supply , that does not inherently make it valuable . Another argument for Bitcoin says it could be an alternative to traditional currency for making payments . The made with Bitcoin was more than a decade ago : two pizzas , paid for with 10,000 bitcoins . ( I hope the buyer enjoyed the pizzas , because the coins would now be worth US $ 500 million . ) Despite the hype , very few vendors accept Bitcoin and hardly anyone pays with it . A Sydney art gallery that accepts Bitcoin has with it , while a bar that accepts it reports no customers using it for years . Even some crypto conferences . You can buy an “ I accept Bitcoin ” t-shirt on Amazon but you can not pay for it using Bitcoin . This is unlikely to change materially . Tesla has hinted it may accept Bitcoin , but so far does not . There are inherent limits to the ability of Bitcoin to provide payment services . The Bitcoin network can only handle , compared with the 1,000 per second allowed by Australia ’ s Fast Settlement Service . Transactions may be . If any electronic currency becomes a significant payment medium , it is likely to be a which would be legal tender and able to be used for very large numbers of transactions . Musk has plans to , so maybe he will declare Bitcoin the legal tender there . But until then it would be better for all of us if he kept it off Tesla ’ s balance sheet .
Still from ‘ Mars ’ by Grimes x Mac . NFTs explained : what they are , why rock stars are using them , and why they ’ re selling for millions of dollars March 4 , 2021 11.01pm GMT Deakin University Author PhD , Media and Politics , Deakin University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation AU . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list A couple of days ago , the musician Grimes sold some she made with her brother Mac on a website called Nifty Gateway . Some were one-offs , while others were limited editions of a few hundred – and all were in about 20 minutes , with total takings of more than US $ 6 million . Despite the steep price tag , anybody can watch or ( with a simple right-click ) save a copy of the videos , which show a cherub ascending over , , and . Rather than a copy of the files themselves , the eager buyers received a special kind of tradable certificate called a “ non-fungible token ” or NFT . But what they were really paying for was an aura of authenticity – and the ability to one day sell that aura of authenticity to somebody else . NFTs are a cultural answer to creating technical scarcity on the internet , and they allow new types of digital goods . They are making inroads into the realms of , and even new mass-markets of . In the process , they are also . Read more : How NFTs work NFTs are digital certificates that authenticate a claim of ownership to an asset , and allow it to be transferred or sold . The certificates are secured with blockchain technology similar to what underpins Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies . A blockchain is a decentralised . Blockchains usually store information in encrypted form across a peer-to-peer network , which makes them very difficult to hack or tamper with . This in turn makes them useful for keeping important records . Read more : The key difference between NFTs and cryptocurrencies is that currencies allow fungible trade , which means anyone can create Bitcoins that can be exchanged for other Bitcoins . NFTs are by definition non-fungible , and are deployed as individual chains of ownership to track a specific asset . NFTs are designed to uniquely restrict and represent a unique claim on an asset . And here ’ s where things get weird . Often , NFTs are used to claim “ ownership ” of a digital asset that is otherwise completely copiable , pastable and shareable – such as a movie , JPEG or other digital file . So what is an authentic original digital copy ? Online , it ’ s hard to say what authenticity and ownership really mean . Internet culture and the internet itself have been driven by copying , pasting and remixing to engender new forms of . At a technical level , the internet is precisely a system for taking a string of ones and zeroes from this computer and making them accessible on a that computer , somewhere else . Content available online is typically what economists call “ ” , which means that one person watching or sharing or remixing a file doesn ’ t in any way impede other people from the doing the same . Constant sharing adds up to a near-infinite array of material to view , share , copy or remix into something new , creating the on which online culture thrives . TikTok is built around reimagining common audio loops with seemingly endless but unique , which are themselves mimicked in seemingly endless variations . On Twitter , tweets are only valuable to the extent they are retweeted . Fake news only exists insofar as decides sharing them will increase engagement via driving more sharing . Information wants to be free The life and longevity of digital content has depended on its ability to . The internet ’ s pioneering cyber-libertarians had a motto to describe this : . Attempts to stop information spreading online have historically required breaking aspects of technology or like copyright . NFTs , however , bring code and culture together to create a form of control that doesn ’ t rely on the law or sabotaging existing systems . They create a unique kind of “ authenticity ” in a otherwise shareable world . What ’ s next ? Nearly 40 years ago , Canadian science-fiction writer William Gibson famously described cyberspace as a “ ” in which billions of users agreed that the online world was real . NFTs take this to the next level : they ’ re a consensual hallucination that this string of ones and zeroes is different and more authentic than that ( identical ) string of ones and zeroes . NFTs work by reintroducing a mutual hallucination of scarcity into a world of abundance . There is no shortage of buyers : the NFT market is already worth hundreds of millions of dollars . Even humble will never be the same . Are NFTs different enough to break the internet ? The real function of NFTs is to create a clear delineation between ordinary creators and consumers of online content and those privileged enough to be paid to produce content or claim to own “ authentic ” work . The internet decentralised content creation , but NFTs are trying to recentralise the distribution of culture . NFTs facilitate the exchange of fungible money for non-fungible authenticity . It ’ s a that occurs in all sorts of industries , and one with a long history in , well , . Read more : How the culture-code of NFTs will evolve is , but at the moment , it is opening a lot of new ways to make change hands . At first take , it might seem that this presents artists everywhere with a recourse to get paid for their otherwise copy-pastable work . Yet creating normative rules around paying for content online has not so far gone smoothly : think of the musicians receive from streaming services like Spotify . NFTs have also been for their profligate energy consumption , because they depend on a lot of computer power to encrypt their tokens . According to the online calculator at , the computations required to create NFTs for each of Grimes ’ animations would have used enough electricity to boil a kettle 1.5 million times – and resulted in around 70 tonnes of CO₂ emissions . I ’ m not sure that cost for future generations was priced into the current market value , or any appreciation as tokens cryptographically change hands . Other than their tonnes of CO₂ emissions , what ’ s real about NFTs is how their creation of technical scarcity enables a new cultural agreement about how something can be authentic and who controls that authenticity . NFTs create new forms of hierarchy , power and exclusion on the wider web . They have already created a new type of haves and have-nots .
A NFT is a digital file with verified identity and ownership . What are NFTs and why are people paying millions for them ? March 17 , 2021 6.20pm GMT Updated March 23 , 2021 4.24pm GMT Ryerson University Author Associate Professor , Finance , Ryerson University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a founding partner of The Conversation CA . provides funding as a member of The Conversation CA-FR . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Last week , Christie ’ s sold . This week , Elon Musk said he ’ s selling a tweet of his as an NFT , which contains a song about NFTs . The and millions more are pouring into the market — he has since tweeted , “ Actually , doesn ’ t feel quite right selling this . Will pass. ” And sites like ( where you can buy , sell and trade digital NBA cards ) have . It might sound ridiculous but the explosive market of crypto-collectibles and crypto-art is no joke . I investigate cryptocurrencies and . To help you understand what an NFT is and why they ’ re becoming so popular , here ’ s an explainer to make sense of it all . What is an NFT ? A is a digital file with verified identity and ownership . This verification is done using blockchain technology . Blockchain technology , simply put , is an un-hackable system based on the mathematics of cryptography . So , that ’ s why you hear a lot of “ crypto ” when referring to NFTs — crypto-art , crypto-collectibles , etc . What is fungibility ? Fungibility is the ability of an asset to be interchanged with other individual assets of the same kind ; it implies equal value between the assets . If you own a fungible asset you can readily interchange it for another of a similar kind . Fungible assets simplify the exchange and trade processes , and the best example would be ( you guessed it ) money . Is NFT the same as Bitcoin ? This is where I can explain and emphasize the “ non-fungibility ” property of NFTs . The main difference between NFTs and Bitcoins is the fact that Bitcoins are limited , and fungible ( you can trade one Bitcoin with another and both have the same value and price ) . NFTs are unique but unlimited , and non-fungible ( no two artworks are the same ) . While NFTs can appreciate in value ( just like real estate ) , they can not be interchanged for another NFT . What does this mean for the future of money ? While not directly related to NFTs , it ’ s important to mention some properties of money . Among many properties , money has to be fungible ( one unit is viewed as interchangeable as another ) , and divisible ( can be divided into smaller units of value ) . NFTs are not fungible nor ( easily ) divisible . For example , a single dollar is easily convertible into four quarters or ten dimes , but currently you can not divide one NFT ( although the blockchain technology behind may allow it in future ) . In fact , fungibility and divisibility are part of five requirements for a currency to exist in a regulated economy . Why are NFTs being valued ? The importance of NFTs lies in providing the ability to securely value , purchase and exchange digital art using a digital ledger . NFTs started in online gaming , later with ( CryptoKicks ) and then by the famous of a digital art piece . NFTs are commonly created by uploading files , such as digital artwork , to an auction market . Just like any other form of art , NFTs are not mutually interchangeable , making them more like “ collectible ” items . The allows the digital art to be “ tokenized ” and for the ownership to be safely stored using a decentralized , open-source blockchain ( that is , anyone can check the ledger ) , featuring smart contract functionality . This means the traditional role of a “ middle man ” for selling the art is now digitized . Is owning the NFTs the same as owning the copyright ? No , to the art ; they are distinct from one another . The ownership of the NFT is established using a digital ledger , which anyone can access because it is stored openly . This ledger tracks who owns an NFT and ensures that the NFT can ’ t be duplicated or tampered with , essentially a “ smart contract. ” What does the future hold for NFTs ? It is undeniable that digital assets and blockchain technology are changing the future of trade . As a result , NFTs are also at the helm of this positive growth . However , just like other examples in history ( e.g . , the dotcom bubble , etc . ) , certain valuations may see the need for future corrections depending on socio-economic desires and the chance of a bubble . Every generation has its own niche attachment to certain valuations whether for vanity or other reasons . NFTs are currently very popular among younger generations , but whether this generation will have the economic power to purchase or find use for them in the future , is both a social and economic question . For NFTs the true potential is yet to be uncovered . Whether big industry players in art , design or fashion will buy into it or not is also yet to be seen . One thing is for sure , NFTs did open the door for many digital artists to be identified and valued , and the smart contract functionalities of the blockchain technology will be used in future valuations of many assets . This is a corrected version of a story originally published on March 17 , 2021 . The earlier story said Bitcoin was not divisible , but it is .
NFTs can be used to prove who created and who owns digital items like these images by the artist Beeple shown at an exhibition in Beijing . How nonfungible tokens work and where they get their value – a cryptocurrency expert explains NFTs March 31 , 2021 1.16pm BST Arizona State University Author Research Professor of Computing , Informatics and Decision Systems Engineering , Arizona State University Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation US . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list Takeaways · Nonfungible tokens prove ownership of a digital item – image , sound file or text – in the same way that people own crypto coins . · Unlike crypto coins , which are identical and worth the same , NFTs are unique . · An NFT is worth what someone is willing to pay for it , which can be a lot if the NFT is made by a famous artist and the buyer is a wealthy collector . An attorney friend recently asked me out of the blue about nonfungible tokens , or NFTs . What prompted his interest was the sale of a collage composed of 5,000 digital pieces , auctioned by Christie ’ s on March 11 , 2021 , for a . Mike Winkelmann , an artist known as , created this piece of digital art , made an NFT of it and offered it for sale . The bidding started at $ 100 , and the rest of the auctioning process transformed it into a historical event . Similarly , it was hard to miss the news about the iconic GIF being sold as a piece of art , Twitter ’ s founder transforming the and putting it up for sale , or an NFT of a New York Times column for charity . My friend ’ s questions were an attempt to understand where the underlying value of an NFT comes from . The issue is that perceptions of what the buyer is paying for are not easily framed in legal terms . NFT marketplaces do not always accurately describe the value proposition of the goods they are selling . The truth is that the value of any NFT is speculative . Its value is determined by what someone else is willing to pay for it and nothing else . Turning something as ephemeral as a tweet into an item that can be sold requires two things : making it unique and proving ownership . The process is the same for cryptocurrencies , which turn strings of bits into virtual coins that have real-world value . It boils down to cryptography . Keys and blocks Cryptography is the technique used to protect privacy of a message by transforming it into a form that can be understood only by the intended recipients . Everyone else will see it as only an unintelligible sequence of random characters . This message manipulation is enabled by a pair of keys , public and private keys : You share your public key with your friend , who uses it to transform his message to you into an unintelligible sequence of random characters . You then use your private key to put it back into its original form . The special mathematical properties of these two crypto keys are widely used to provide secrecy and integrity . play the role of digital signatures and are commonly used in blockchain to enable both authentication and anonymity for transactions . Blockchain is a crucial technology for creating NFTs . It uses cryptography to chain blocks into a growing list of records . Each block is locked by a cryptographic hash , or string of characters that uniquely identifies a set of data , to the previous block . The transaction records of a chain of blocks are stored in a data structure called a . This allows for fast retrieval of past records . To be a party in blockchain-based transactions , each user needs to create a pair of keys : a public key and a private key . This design makes it very difficult to alter transaction data stored in blockchain . Although blockchain was initially devised to support fungible assets like Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies , it has evolved to enable users to create a special kind of crypto asset , one that is , meaning provably unique . Ethereum blockchain is the basis for most of the currently offered NFTs because it supports the , enabling NFT creators to capture information of relevance to their digital artifacts and store it as tokens on the blockchain . When you pay for an NFT , what you get is the right to transfer the token to your digital wallet . The token proves that your copy of a digital file is the original , like owning an original painting . And just as masterpiece paintings can be copied and distributed as inexpensive posters , anyone can have a digital copy of your NFT . Your private crypto key is proof of ownership of the original . The content creator ’ s public crypto key serves as a certificate of authenticity for that particular digital artifact . This pair of the creator ’ s public key and the owner ’ s private key is primarily what determines the value of any NFT token . The very short history of NFTs NFTs came to prominence in 2017 with a game called , which enables players to buy and “ breed ” limited-edition virtual cats . From there , game developers adopted NFTs in a big way to allow gamers to win in-game items such as digital shields , swords or similar prizes , and other game collectibles . Tokenization of game assets is a real game-changer , since it enables transferring tokens between different games or to another player via NFT specialized blockchain marketplaces . Besides gaming , NFTs are frequently used to sell a wide range of virtual collectibles , including NBA virtual trading cards , music , digital images , video clips and even virtual real estate in , a virtual world . , a website that tracks NFT projects and marketplaces , puts the value of the total NFT market at $ 250 million , a negligible fraction of the total crypto coin market but still highly attractive to content creators . The contract behind the token , based on the standard for creating NFTs , can be set to let content creators continue to earn a percentage from all subsequent sales . The NFT market is likely to grow further because any piece of digital information can easily be “ minted ” into an NFT , a highly efficient way of managing and securing digital assets . Blockchain ’ s carbon footprint For all the excitement , there are also concerns that NFTs are because they are built on the same blockchain technology used by some energy-hungry cryptocurrencies . For example , each NFT transaction on the Ethereum network consumes the equivalent of . Security for most of today ’ s blockchain networks is based on special computers called “ miners ” competing to solve complex math puzzles . This is the principle , which keeps people from gaming the system and provides the incentive for building and maintaining it . The miner who solves the math problem first gets awarded with a prize paid in virtual coins . The mining requires a lot of computational power , which drives electricity consumption . Ethereum blockchain technology is evolving and moving toward . There are also emerging blockchain technologies like , which was designed from the outset to have a small carbon footprint and has recently launched its own fast-growing NFT platform called . The speed of transformation of blockchain technology into a newer , more eco-friendly variant might well decide the future of the NFT market in the short term . Some artists who feel strongly about global warming trends are opposed to NFTs because of perceived . The coming crypto-economy Whether or not the current NFT craze can keep its momentum going , NFTs have already accelerated a larger trend of digital economic innovation . NFTs have confirmed that the public is feeling increasingly favorable toward a crypto-economy and is in return for creating new business possibilities . [ Over 100,000 readers rely on The Conversation ’ s newsletter to understand the world . . ] NFTs have already made significant inroads into the luxury and gaming industries , and have plenty of room to grow beyond these initial applications . The art sector will continue to be an important segment of the overall NFT market and is likely to gradually reach maturity over the next couple of years , although it is likely to be surpassed by other digital certificate applications like trademarks and patents , training and certificates .
NFTs : why digital art has such a massive carbon footprint April 1 , 2021 2.42pm BST Northumbria University , Newcastle Author Senior Lecturer in International Development , Northumbria University , Newcastle Disclosure statement Partners provides funding as a member of The Conversation UK . The Conversation UK receives funding from these organisations View the full list How much would you be willing to pay for a one-of-a-kind work of art ? For some collectors , the limit lies somewhere in the region of hundreds of millions of dollars . What about a work of art that has no tangible form , and exists only as a digital token that ’ s no more “ real ” than a JPEG file ? Welcome to the strange world of crypto art collectibles , also known as NFTs . Like Bitcoin , NFTs ( non-fungible tokens ) are cryptocurrencies . But whereas individual bitcoins all have the same value , NFTs are more like baseball cards . Each token has a different value and they can ’ t be used to buy things . They exist on your computer as digital representations of artworks , songs , films and games , among other things . NFTs have been around since 2017 , when the first mainstream experiment in crypto-collectibles emerged : . The average price for one of these cat cards was about US $ 60 back then . But that ’ s chicken feed compared to current takings . Rights to a single digital image recently ( £50.2 million ) . ( a crudely drawn alien with a pipe ) sold for US $ 7.5 million . A house on Mars was purchased for US $ 500,000 . that is , not one that you might live in . Twitter CEO , Jack Dorsey , recently as an NFT for just under US $ 3 million . “ But how can someone buy a tweet ? ” , you may ask . After all , anyone ’ s free to click on , look at , print out and frame as many times as they like . When you buy an NFT , you ’ re buying a unique certificate of ownership , which is locked away on an immutable distributed database known as a blockchain . The creator of the artwork generally retains the copyright and in most cases , you own little more than bragging rights . Creators are also likely to pass the ( or “ minting ” them ) on to you ( around US $ 100 as I write this ) . Most of the time , what you ’ ll also be responsible for is an enormous carbon footprint . Counting the carbon cost of NFTs Because they depend on a blockchain , NFTs use a lot of energy . Most creators still use , a blockchain secured using a to Bitcoin . This involves an energy-intensive computer function called mining . Specialist mining computers take turns guessing the combination to a digital lock ( a long string of random digits ) . The computer that correctly guesses the combination wins a reward paid in a cryptocurrency called Ether . The digital lock resets roughly every 15 seconds , and the competition continues . Ethereum uses about a year , about as much as the whole of Nigeria . It ’ s very difficult to calculate exactly how much responsibility the NFT industry should take for Ethereum ’ s carbon emissions . Ethereum was going to run with or without NFTs . But with the growing demand for digital art , NFT buyers and sellers are becoming liable for an increasing share of Ethereum ’ s total energy use , and some artists are starting to think twice . The French digital artist , Joanie Lemercier , recently cancelled the sale of six works after calculating the associated energy costs . The sale would use , in just ten seconds , enough electricity to power for two years . ArtStation , a site for digital artists to showcase their portfolios , recently developed an NFT marketplace . But within hours of telling the world about the planned launch , widespread condemnation on social media . Alternative technologies exist that enable NFT markets without the carbon headache . Sidechains use negligible amounts of energy to process NFTs because these transactions occur on a more centralised platform where costs ( and carbon footprints ) are much lower . Damien Hirst is of NFTs called The Currency Project using the Palm sidechain . Hirst will still be though , so his NFTs could still come with hefty carbon baggage . Taking artistic license with climate solutions that the increasing popularity of blockchain technology , with its , provides incentives for upgrading energy grids from fossil fuels to renewable sources . Similar arguments have been made by the airline industry : in order to fund the efficiency innovations that could make aviation greener , people should . For NFTs , evidence shows this approach is . Due to the competitive nature of proof-of-work mining , booming NFT markets are encouraging the construction of reliable coal-fired power stations , so that crypto miners don ’ t have to suffer intermittent access to renewable generation . Some NFT creators are trying to have their crypto-cake and eat it by using carbon offsets . funds conservation work , with each carbon credit purchased equivalent to one tonne of carbon saved , which is either stored in a tree or theoretically prevented from escaping into the atmosphere through some sort of industrial innovation . The provides an emissions calculator and sells carbon credits to offset emissions caused by NFT transactions . The NFT marketplace Nifty Gateway recently auctioned eight carbon net-negative NFTs “ ” . The artworks received 60 carbon credits . Each offset was itself an NFT . NFT carbon credits ( or any carbon credits for that matter ) and a belief that carbon , like NFTs on a blockchain , can be immutably locked away in trees forever . . explains that offsets make sense for neutralising our unavoidable emissions , “ after we ’ ve done all attainable actions ” to reduce our carbon footprint . But does acquiring bragging rights to a digital image that anyone with an internet connection can enjoy constitute an unavoidable part of one ’ s carbon footprint ?
Coinbase ’ s Public Listing Is a Cryptocurrency Coming-Out Party With acceptance from traditional investors , a profitable start-up that eases transactions is offering proof of the industry ’ s staying power . Supported by SAN FRANCISCO — Digital currency , once mocked as a tool for criminals and reckless speculators , is sliding into the mainstream . Traditional banks are helping investors put their money into cryptocurrency funds . Companies like Tesla and Square are hoarding . And celebrities are leading the way in a digital-art spending spree using a . On Wednesday , digital or cryptocurrencies took their biggest step yet toward wider acceptance when , a start-up that allows people to buy and sell cryptocurrencies , went public . Coinbase shares began trading at $ 381 each , up 52 percent from a reference price of $ 250 , eventually closing at $ 328.28 . That gave the company a valuation of $ 85.7 billion based on all its outstanding shares , more than 10 times higher than Coinbase ’ s last private valuation . Call it crypto ’ s coming-out party . Coinbase , based in San Francisco , is the first major cryptocurrency start-up to go public on a U.S. stock market . It did so at a valuation that rivaled that of Airbnb and Facebook when they went public . Cryptocurrency advocates — many of whom expect the technology to upend the global financial system — are celebrating the watershed as vindication of their long-held belief in their cause ’ s potential . Coinbase ’ s listing answers the question “ Is crypto a real thing ? ” said Bradley Tusk , a venture capital investor whose firm , Tusk Venture Partners , backed Coinbase . “ Any industry that can launch an I.P.O . of this size is without a doubt a real thing , and it ’ s proven by the market. ” The listing gives mainstream investors who may be wary of directly buying risky digital currencies the ability to own stock in a Securities and Exchange Commission-approved business that facilitates the transactions . It also gives the financial world a look at Coinbase ’ s healthy profits — something that most other highly valued tech start-ups lack — and ballooning adoption . Coinbase , which has 1,700 employees and 56 million registered users , reported an estimated $ 730 million to $ 800 million in net profit in the first three months of the year . It brought in $ 1.8 billion in revenue during that period , a ninefold increase from a year earlier . “ It blows a lot of the traditional tech and finance companies out of the water , ” said Jalak Jobanputra , founder of Future\Perfect Ventures , an investor in the category . “ It wasn ’ t that long ago that people just thought crypto wasn ’ t big enough. ” But Coinbase ’ s listing also raises a question about the future of digital currency . Industry evangelists have long predicted that cryptocurrency and its underlying blockchain technology could bring about a decentralized financial system without governments or banks — a revolution rivaling that of the internet . That ethos is reflected in Coinbase ’ s to “ create an open financial system for the world ” and “ . ” But so far , cryptocurrency is mostly a vehicle for financial speculation and trading . Few people want to use Bitcoin for everyday purchases like coffee because its price is so volatile . It has also become a lightning rod for because its technology uses a tremendous amount of computing power and electricity . Many early buyers have become wildly rich by simply holding their crypto or “ buying the dip ” when prices fall . Others ruefully relay they bought with Bitcoin years ago that would be worth $ 200,000 today or the . Coinbase eases that trading by acting as a central exchange . Before it and similar services were created , people had to set up their own digital wallets and wire money . “ Can it be anything more than an asset class ? ” Mr. Tusk asked . “ That ’ s still very much up in the air. ” Coinbase ’ s trajectory has followed the booms and busts of the broader crypto world . Brian Armstrong , a former software engineer at Airbnb , and Fred Ehrsam , a former trader at Goldman Sachs , started in the company in 2012 , when Bitcoin was the only digital currency and it wasn ’ t very useful or valuable . “ It was perceived as unserious or shady , ” just like the early days of the internet , said Marc Bernegger , an investor at Crypto Finance Group , an asset manager in Switzerland . Headlines about , a marketplace for buying and selling drugs and weapons with Bitcoin until the federal authorities shut it down , and , a crypto exchange that collapsed under accusations of theft and embezzlement , further tarnished the young industry . Coinbase tried to change that . The company joined Y Combinator , a prestigious start-up program , and raised money from top venture capital firms including Union Square Ventures and Andreessen Horowitz . Mr. Armstrong was one of the few people in the industry who seemed prepared to comply with inevitable regulations , rather than cut corners to avoid them , said Nick Tomaino , who dropped out of business school to join Coinbase in 2013 . Coinbase also persuaded well-known retailers to accept Bitcoin . “ It was good for credibility when people saw you could actually use a Bitcoin to buy a mattress at Overstock , ” Mr. Tomaino , who left in 2016 , said . Coinbase earned money on transaction fees . But Bitcoin ’ s wildly volatile price and a slow computer network that managed it made transactions difficult , and people began to see the currency as an investment . In 2015 , Ethereum , a cryptocurrency network with more tech abilities , was introduced , enticing enthusiasts to build companies and funds around the technology . Soon after , a flood of “ initial coin offerings , ” where companies sold tokens on the promise of the technology they planned to build , . But it quickly deflated after many projects were found to be frauds and U.S. regulators deemed the offerings to be securities , requiring that they comply with financial rules . Over the last year , day trading and a has pushed the value of Bitcoin , Ether ( the currency of the Ethereum network ) and other tokens to new heights , ushering in yet another boom . It inspired and the payments company Square to spend $ 170 million . In March , Morgan Stanley began offering its wealthy clients access to three Bitcoin funds , and Goldman announced that it would soon offer similar access . The mayor of Miami has proposed that the city accept tax payments in Bitcoin and in the asset . The stock trading app Robinhood that 9.5 million of its customers had traded cryptocurrency in the first three months of the year — up more than fivefold from the previous three months . Venture funding for crypto-related start-ups surged to its highest-ever level in the first quarter to $ 3 billion , according to PitchBook . PayPal recently added a crypto trading and shopping feature for its customers in the United States . The company was motivated by consumer interest and advances in the technology that made transactions faster . It plans to quickly expand the offering to customers around the world . “ It feels like the time is right , ” said Jose Fernandez da Ponte , head of PayPal ’ s blockchain , crypto and digital currencies group . “ We think this has the potential to revolutionize payments and financial systems in general. ” Still , the so-called revolution faces some challenges . Coinbase has sometimes struggled to keep up with demand , with some customers who lost access to their accounts complaining that the . It has also received criticism for its . Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen has threatened harsher regulation of the currencies , including limiting their use . And a big drop in prices could again send speculators fleeing . In its financial prospectus , Coinbase warned that its business results would fluctuate with the volatility of crypto assets , “ many of which are unpredictable and in certain instances are outside of our control. ” The industry ’ s biggest issue — fulfilling the promise that the technology is more than just a place to park money — could take another decade to play out . “ There ’ s no doubt we ’ re in the latest boom , and I don ’ t know if that ’ s going to turn tomorrow or two years from now , ” Mr. Tomaino said . “ But the busts and booms are always higher than the last. ” Advertisement Site Index Site Information Navigation RELEASE aa120f700c5a2b264ec4930158e0dbeef8a20bb2 
ICYMI | The Taxation of Cryptocurrency Virtual Transactions Bring Real-Life Tax Implications Bitcoin and several rival forms of cryptocurrency experienced record-breaking growth in recent years , leaving many investors and their CPAs grappling with uncertainty and surprise during tax season . Many returns were put on extension , awaiting further guidance from the IRS , while other taxpayers found themselves faced with an unexpectedly large tax bill as a result of misconceptions surrounding how these transactions are taxed . Cryptocurrency is digital currency that uses encryption techniques , rather than a central bank , to generate , exchange , and transfer units of currency . Unlike cash transactions , no bank or government authority verifies the transfer of funds . Instead , these virtual transactions are recorded in a digitized public ledger called a “ blockchain. ” Individual units of the currency are called “ coins. ” Introduced in 2009 , Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency and remains the most widely used . Other forms have grown tremendously in popularity since then , including Litecoin , Ethereum , and Ripple . While cryptocurrency exchanges have experienced booms and busts in the market , experts predict the use of cryptocurrency will continue to increase , making it imperative that CPAs are prepared to understand and educate their clients on the tax implications of these virtual transactions . IRS Treatment of Cryptocurrency The IRS addressed the taxation of cryptocurrency transactions in Notice 2014-21 , which provides that cryptocurrency is treated as property for federal tax purposes . Therefore , general tax principles that apply to property transactions must be applied to exchanges of cryptocurrencies as well . Notice 2014-21 holds that taxpayers must recognize gain or loss on the exchange of cryptocurrency for cash or for other property . Accordingly , gain or loss is recognized every time that cryptocurrency is sold or used to purchase goods or services . How the gain or loss is recognized depends largely on the type of transaction conducted and the length of time the position was held . Settled for cash . Cryptocurrency gains from trading coins held as capital assets are treated as investment income by the IRS , and the same capital gains rules apply . A taxpayer who sells a coin position for cash must report a capital gain on Form 8949 . A coin position held for one year or less is considered a short-term capital gain , taxed at ordinary tax rates ; a position held for more than one year is considered a long-term capital gain . As with stock trades , capital losses offset capital gains in full , and a net capital loss is limited to $ 3,000 ( $ 1,500 for married taxpayers filing separately ) against other types of income on an individual tax return . An excess capital loss is carried forward to the subsequent tax year . Under IRS rules , the default for stock transactions is the first-in , first-out ( FIFO ) method of accounting . Under certain circumstances , however , specific identification is allowed . The use of specific identification can drastically reduce the recognized gain on cryptocurrency transactions , since many traders have multiple transactions in the same form of cryptocurrency . While some tax preparers have attempted to use specific identification when reporting cryptocurrency gains , this represents an aggressive approach for two reasons . First , although Notice 2014-21 refers to cryptocurrency as property , it does not—on face value—refer to it as a stock . Second , it is doubtful that an “ adequate identification ” could ever be made with respect to cryptocurrency . The coin being traded is represented by an entry in a distributed ledger held by various parties . Furthermore , it can be divided into an infinite number of parts , and thus lacks any sort of lot number . Without being able to establish adequate identification , FIFO may be the only permissible method . General tax principles that apply to property transactions must be applied to exchanges of cryptocurrencies as well . The gain is also considered investment income for purposes of the Medicare contributions tax introduced in the Affordable Care Act . As a result , taxpayers with modified adjusted gross incomes over $ 200,000 ( $ 250,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly ) are subject to the 3.8 % additional Medicare tax on cryptocurrency gains . Exchanged for other cryptocurrencies . Taxpayers who make coin-to-coin trades ( e.g. , Bitcoin to Ethereum ) may mistakenly assume there is no tax liability because they did not receive any actual funds . Given the IRS ’ s treatment of cryptocurrency as property , however , cryptocurrency trades are subject to the same capital gains and losses rules as all other property exchanges . Some taxpayers and preparers have attempted to delay capital gains income on cryptocurrency-to-cryptocurrency trades by classifying the trades as Internal Revenue Code ( IRC ) section 1031 like-kind exchanges , whereby they can defer income to the replacement position ’ s cost basis . Prior to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ( TCJA ) , it was possible to argue that cryptocurrency could qualify , but there were inherent problems in the applicability of IRC section 1031 to these trades , since they may have failed to meet certain requirements . For example , the currencies are not necessarily “ like-kind ” properties . In addition , reporting such trades under IRC section 1031 must be done properly , using Form 8824 and listing every trade . The TCJA made this debate moot by limiting 1031 like-kind exchanges to real property , not for sale ; starting with tax year 2018 , therefore , this treatment of cryptocurrencies will no longer be even theoretically viable . Cryptocurrency mining . Investors can earn cryptocurrency by using computers to solve a complex mathematical puzzle . As a reward for solving the puzzle , they receive newly “ minted ” coins . Notice 2014-21 states that when a taxpayer successfully mines a cryptocurrency , the fair market value of the coins mined is includible in gross income . Furthermore , an individual whose mining operations constitute a trade or business is subject to self-employment tax on the income derived from those activities . The amount of this income equals the market price of the coins on the day they were awarded on the blockchain . This amount also becomes the miner ’ s basis in the coins going forward and is used to calculate future gains and losses . Example . An investor mines one Bitcoin in 2013 . On the day it was mined , the market price of Bitcoin was $ 1,000 . The investor has $ 1,000 of taxable income in 2013 . Going forward , the basis in that Bitcoin is $ 1,000 . If the investor later sells it for $ 1,200 , there is a taxable gain of $ 200 ( $ 1,200 − $ 1,000 ) . Payment for goods and services . Notice 2014-21 also provides guidance on the taxation of cryptocurrency that is received as employee wages , independent contractor payments for services provided , and other payments for goods or services . Wages paid to employees in cryptocurrency are taxable to the employee and must be reported on Form W-2 . The employee is taxed at the fair market value of the cryptocurrency . Payments made to independent contractors for services provided using cryptocurrency are subject to income tax and self-employment tax and must be reported on Form 1099 . Again , the fair market value of the cryptocurrency establishes the taxable amount . Thus , any taxpayer who receives cryptocurrency as payment for goods or services , either as an employee or an independent contractor , must include the fair market value of the cryptocurrency in his reported taxable income . Coin hard forks ( chain splits ) . A hard fork occurs when there is a split in a cryptocurrency ’ s blockchain . Bitcoin had a hard fork in its blockchain on August 1 , 2017 , dividing into two separate coins : Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash . Each holder of a Bitcoin unit was entitled to one Bitcoin Cash unit . Similarly , Litecoin , the fifth-largest cryptocurrency , had a hard fork—Litecoin Cash—in February 2018 . The IRS has not provided guidance on hard fork transactions , and tax experts and coin traders are still debating its tax treatment . Common questions include : Is a hard fork the same as a stock split ? If so , does the value of the coins have to be divided between the original coin and the fork , or is it a taxable dividend ? Compounding this issue is the fact that coin holders might not be able to sell the new fork currency immediately . The cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase , for example , did not support Bitcoin Cash when it originally forked in August 2017 , but did add it to accounts for rightful holders later that year . Is it therefore acceptable to defer income on the fork transaction until the coin holder obtains such access , or later sells the new , forked coins ? It seems reasonable to assume that coin traders should not have to report taxable income on a hard fork until the new coin is time-stamped as a ledger entry in the blockchain . Donating cryptocurrency . Instead of selling the cryptocurrency and donating the after-tax proceeds , a taxpayer can donate it directly to a charity . This approach provides significant benefits : the tax deduction will be equal to the fair market value of the donated coins ( as determined by a qualified appraisal ) , and the donor will not pay tax on the gain . This also results in a larger donation because , instead of paying capital gains taxes , the charity will receive the full value of the donation . For this strategy to work , the coins must have been held for longer than one year . Fidelity Charitable , a donor-advised fund , reported receiving over $ 69 million in cryptocurrency contributions in 2017 ( ) . IRS Enforcement Despite the uncertainty and lack of guidance in some major areas of cryptocurrency taxation , the IRS is taking an aggressive stance on taxpayers who have not complied with the reporting requirements issued in 2014 . Based on a report from the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration ( TIGTA ) in August 2017 , the IRS announced concern over “ massive ” underreporting of income generated by cryptocurrencies . The report included specific compliance issues and tax guidance for cryptocurrency investors . This course of action suggests the IRS will aggressively pursue enforcement of compliance in cryptocurrency transactions . The IRS went as far as to issue a “ John Doe ” summons to Coinbase , one of the largest cryptocurrency exchanges , requesting the release of transactions from 2013 to 2015 . On November 28 , 2017 , the Federal District Court for the Northern District of California entered an order requiring Coinbase to provide the IRS with data on many of its clients who engaged in transactions exceeding $ 20,000 ; Coinbase added the tax reporting of capital gains and losses to this information . This course of action suggests the IRS will aggressively pursue enforcement of compliance in cryptocurrency transactions . To date , however , no exchanges are required to report cryptocurrency transactions on Form 1099-B . Questions Remain The IRS ’ s guidance in Notice 2014-21 clarifies various aspects of the tax treatment of cryptocurrency transactions , but many questions remain unanswered , such as how cryptocurrencies should be treated for international tax reporting [ e.g. , Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts ( FBAR ) & Foreign Accounts and Tax Compliance Act ( FATCA ) reporting ] and whether cryptocurrency trades prior to 2018 are subject to the like-kind exchange rules . Cryptocurrency appears to be here for the long term , and thus the scrutiny surrounding its reporting will continue to intensify . It behooves CPAs—especially those whose clients maintain positions in one or more cryptocurrencies—to keep abreast of the evolving regulatory picture surrounding this new kind of asset .
New IRS Cryptocurrency Enforcement Efforts and Opportunities to Become Compliant Cryptocurrency is here to stay . As of November 17 , 2019 , the top five cryptocurrencies by market capitalization had a combined value of approximately $ 196 billion , and consumers can now use cryptocurrency in place of legal tender at numerous online and brick-and-mortar retailers . In 2014 , the IRS issued Notice 2014-21 , which generally provided that cryptocurrency would be treated as property for purposes of income tax and was , therefore , subject to the tax principles generally applicable to transactions involving the creation , sale , and acquisition of property . The Compliance Gap Despite the 2014 guidance , the IRS has found that many taxpayers engaging in taxable cryptocurrency transactions have not in fact reported those transactions . A Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration ( TIGTA ) report concluded that cryptocurrency had a greater probability of being used to engage in illegal conduct , including tax evasion , and recommended action . For example , in each year from 2013 to 2015 , fewer than 900 individual taxpayers reported a capital gain transaction related to Bitcoin , a seemingly low figure considering its popularity and value at that time . The IRS has since moved to combat the underreporting of cryptocurrency-related income by taking action on two fronts . First , the IRS has pursued enforcement actions directed at uncovering noncompliant taxpayers . Second , it has issued additional guidance to help clarify the proper reporting of cryptocurrency and to further highlight and publicize that cryptocurrency transactions are reportable where they generate income . Enforcement As noted in a previous installment of this column ( Michael Sardar “ Digital Currency : Market Value of Bitcoin , Ethereum , and Litecoin , ” September 2017 , ) , in 2016 the IRS issued a John Doe summons to Coinbase , a large cryptocurrency exchange , seeking information about its customers . While Coinbase initially challenged the summons and refused to hand over its customers ’ information , the IRS ultimately prevailed , and Coinbase was required to provide customer data for all customers with at least $ 20,000 of cryptocurrency in their accounts . In March 2018 , Coinbase provided account data on approximately 13,000 account holders to the IRS . More recently , and likely based on the information provided to the IRS in response to the Coinbase summons , the IRS has sent targeted letters prompting taxpayers believed to be noncompliant with respect to cryptocurrency reporting to take action to come into compliance . As part of this initiative , the IRS sent out three different letters , with subtle but important differences between them . Letter 6174 . Apparently the softest , this letter refers to a taxpayer “ who may not know the requirements for reporting transactions involving cryptocurrency. ” The letter further notes that taxpayers who receive this letter “ do not need to respond to this letter. ” Letter 6174-A . This letter is very similar to Letter 6174 , but uses more stern language , referring to a taxpayer “ who may not have properly reported [ their ] transactions involving cryptocurrency. ” This letter notes that taxpayers do not need to respond to the letter , but warns , “ however , we may send other correspondence about potential enforcement activity in the future. ” Letter 6173 . This letter refers to taxpayers “ who may not have met [ their ] U.S. tax filing and reporting requirements for transactions involving cryptocurrency. ” This letter appears to be targeted to taxpayers about whom the IRS has the most serious concerns and mandates a response by the date provided in the letter . Letter 6173 requires that a taxpayer either file original or amended returns to report cryptocurrency transactions or provide a statement , signed under penalty of perjury , explaining why the taxpayer is already in compliance with respect to cryptocurrency reporting . The letter notes that taxpayers who do not respond may be referred for examination . All of the letters direct taxpayers to additional resources and information on the tax reporting requirements for cryptocurrency , including Notice 2014-21 . In addition to prompting voluntary compliance from taxpayers who receive the letters , they serve to put such taxpayers on notice of their cryptocurrency tax obligations . Taxpayers who receive and ignore these letters will not be able to assert ignorance of their obligations in response to future enforcement efforts by the IRS , which can include civil audits , imposition of penalties , and even criminal prosecution . Additional Guidance The IRS has also recently issued additional guidance on the subject of cryptocurrency . The guidance answers numerous questions that were left open after the issuance of Notice 2014-21 and also addresses some new cryptocurrency developments that have raised new tax questions . The purpose of this additional guidance is obviously to answer the specific questions addressed ; however , it also serves the larger goal of increasing voluntary compliance . More guidance inevitably translates into increased compliance because it allows taxpayers who wish to be compliant , but do not know the rules , to report and pay tax on their transactions in a correct manner . In furtherance of that goal , on October 9 , 2019 , the IRS issued Revenue Ruling 2019-24 , supplementing previous guidance . This revenue ruling addresses the tax consequences of “ hard forks ” and “ airdrops. ” A hard fork occurs when a cryptocurrency , which is generally recorded on a distributed ledger , experiences a diversion , whereby the original ( or “ legacy ” ) cryptocurrency and all transactions in it continue to be recorded on the original ledger , while the new cryptocurrency is created and recorded on a new ledger . At the time of a hard fork , owners of the legacy currency may or may not receive units of the new currency ; this is an airdrop . Revenue Ruling 2019-24 states that taxpayers who experience a hard fork without an airdrop ( i.e. , they do not receive any units of the new currency ) , have not experienced a taxable event at the time of the hard fork . On the other hand , if a taxpayer receives an airdrop of a new currency after a hard fork , the taxpayer has experienced a taxable event and is required to report as income the value of the newly received currency . Revenue Ruling 2019-24 provides the following examples : A owns 50 units of cryptocurrency M. Cryptocurrency M experiences a hard fork , resulting in the creation of cryptocurrency N. A , however , does not receive any units of currency N and continues to own only 50 units of currency M. A does not have taxable income as a result of the hard fork . B owns 50 units of cryptocurrency R. Cryptocurrency R experiences a hard fork , resulting in the creation of cryptocurrency S. On that date , 25 units of currency S are airdropped to B , who has access to the new currency . After the hard fork and airdrop , B now has 50 units of currency R and 25 units of currency S. Because B has received a new asset in the form of currency S , B must recognize taxable income equal to the fair market value of currency S. Also on October 9 , 2019 , the IRS issued 43 Frequently Asked Questions ( FAQ ) addressing additional areas of uncertainty with respect to cryptocurrency . Examples of the FAQ guidance include the following : A Strong Compliance Push The IRS ’ s enforcement efforts and its issuance of substantial guidance with respect to cryptocurrency are clear indications that it takes the issue seriously and will more aggressively pursue taxpayers who continue to be noncompliant regarding cryptocurrency income . As the taxability of cryptocurrency receives increasing publicity , and as the IRS continues to answer cryptocurrency questions , taxpayers who continue to get it wrong will be hard-pressed to argue that such errors were innocent mistakes and will be subject to an increased likelihood of facing civil penalties and criminal consequences . Taxpayers who are not properly reporting cryptocurrency income should quickly seek professional guidance on their tax obligations and their options for coming into compliance .
Figuring Out Cryptoassets I read with interest the article in the June 2019 CPA Journal by Andre Sterley ( “ Cryptoassets : Accounting for an Emerging Asset Class , ” ) . It ’ s an excellent article about how cryptoassets ( a superset of cryptocurrencies ) can not fit well within U.S. GAAP or IFRS . I make these two comments : For next steps , this should really be a call for academia to research this asset phenomenon and arrive at recommendations for accounting measurement , recognition and classification , protocols for attest and audit , and possible regulations . It appears that for now , the U.S. marketplace is overregulated and possibly losing in capital due to lack of maturity in the understanding of this class of assets . There may also be an unknown risk to auditors opining on such assets . Second , as it stands now , managers and especially auditors should be wary of the “ GAAP trap ” that allows cryptoassets to be evaluated as a probable or “ likely ” future benefit . The threshold of “ likely ” should not be interpreted simplistically as a “ possibility , or probability greater than 0 % . ” Such an interpretation may lead to accidental or intentional inflation of value and misclassification of an expense as an asset .
Cryptoassets : Accounting for an Emerging Asset Class The growth of cryptoassets has made it incredibly challenging for regulators worldwide to standardize and issue authoritative guidance . Professional accounting standards setting bodies , including FASB and the IASB , are certainly no exception . Accountants with a deep knowledge of cryptoassets and blockchain technology are already increasingly in demand , as an intricate understanding of both the technology and accounting standards is required to provide appropriate guidance . What started out with Bitcoin in 2009 grew to a handful of cryptocurrencies with a combined market value of approximately $ 1 billion in 2013 ; this ballooned into an $ 800 billion sector by the fourth quarter of 2017 , followed by a significant crash in 2018 . Over $ 3.2 billion were invested in crypto startups through initial coin offerings ( ICO ) in 2017 , and Bitcoin alone transacts multiple billions of dollars every day . As of this writing , there are more than 2,000 different cryptoassets , and while Bitcoin accounts for the majority of the total market value , there are also many other cryptoassets that do not seek to function primarily as a form of payment . As the global economic and regulatory landscape has evolved , new categories of cryptoassets have emerged . Historically , all cryptoassets have been commonly referred to as cryptocurrencies , which can be misleading , as not all seek to function as a form of payment . Various classification frameworks are being published , and some of the most common other categories include utility tokens , which are intended to provide access to an application or service by means of a blockchain-based infrastructure ; security-or asset-backed tokens , which function like stocks , bonds , and other traditional securities ; and cryptocollectibles , which are cryptographically unique and limited in quantity . This emerging asset class does not fit well into the existing regulatory environment . The IRS ruled in 2014 to have Bitcoin taxed as property in the United States , effectively limiting it for its intended purpose of payment for goods and services . In addition , dozens of crypto startups have left the United States because of regulation such as the BitLicense in New York . Besides the SEC and the IRS , a litany of other regulators have weighed in , including the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission ( CFTC ) , Financial Crimes Enforcement Network ( FinCEN ) , and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority ( FINRA ) . As of yet , no specific guidance for cryptocurrencies has been issued under either U.S. GAAP or IFRS . How are companies accounting for cryptoassets , and are existing accounting standards sufficient and appropriate to be applied to this new emerging asset class ? It is important to realize that the term “ cryptoasset ” is broad and , depending on the coin or token being evaluated , can vary widely in associated terms and conditions . In addition , terms and conditions may evolve and thus need to be reevaluated for appropriate accounting treatment . Other considerations include the purpose of the holder and the business model of the entity in question . The scope of this article is limited to cryptocurrencies or coins that function as a form of payment , such as Bitcoin , ZCash , and Litecoin . Meeting the Definition of an Asset It is important to consider whether cryptocurrencies do , in fact , meet the definition and recognition criteria of an asset . Under U.S. GAAP , an item that meets the definition of an asset is recognized when its cost or value can be measured reliably . Note that the probability of any future economic benefit associated with the item is not a recognition requirement under U.S. GAAP . Under IFRS , an asset is a “ resource controlled by the entity as a result of past events and from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to the entity. ” An item that meets the definition of an asset is recognized when it is probable that any future economic benefit associated with the item will flow to the entity and the item ’ s cost or value can be measured with reliability . “ Probable ” under IFRS is defined as “ more likely than not , ” that is , a probability of greater than 50 % . Under U.S. GAAP , probable is defined as “ likely , ” and no percentage threshold is defined . Entities will need to assess whether a cryptocurrency meets such criteria and determine whether the uncertainty around its future economic benefits is not sufficiently volatile that it is not an asset . Cash or Cash Equivalents If it has been determined that the definition and recognition criteria of an asset have been met , the next question is one of classification . Is the asset cash or a cash equivalent ? The significant volatility of cryptocurrencies , along with the fact that they are not considered legal tender ( because they are not backed by a government nor widely accepted as a medium of exchange ) would prevent holders from being able to “ convert to a known amount of cash. ” Thus , cryptocurrencies can not be classified as cash or cash equivalents under U.S. GAAP or IFRS . Financial Instruments As defined under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP , financial instruments would seem like a natural classification for cryptocurrencies , allowing measurement at fair value and recording of changes in fair value in profit and loss . Cryptocurrencies , however , generally do not provide the holder with a contractual right to receive or exchange cash or a financial instrument and thus are not financial assets . That said , certain cryptocurrency futures ( contracts to buy or sell cryptocurrencies in the future ) that settle in cash could be considered derivatives and accounted for as financial instruments . In addition , there may be circumstances under which an entity holds cryptocurrency as an investment that falls within the scope of “ investment company status ” under U.S. GAAP , which would result in accounting for such investment , initially and subsequently , at fair value . Inventory Cryptocurrencies are often mined or purchased with the intention of reselling them , and thus it can be argued that they meet at least part of the definition of inventory under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS . As cryptocurrencies are not tangible in nature , however , they can not meet the definition of inventory under U.S. GAAP . Because inventory under IFRS does not need to be tangible , a case can be made that cryptocurrencies may meet this definition ; however , the volume of trading may not be sufficient to qualify as “ held in the ordinary course of business. ” If the inventory standard were chosen to account for cryptocurrency , the currency would need to be held at the lower of cost and net realizable value under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP . It is fair to say that accounting for cryptocurrency under the aforementioned measurement criteria in the current volatile market would not provide useful information to users of financial statements . One exception would be commodity broker-dealers buying or selling cryptocurrencies within the normal course of business . This would allow cryptocurrencies to be measured at fair value , less costs to sell , with changes recognized in profit and loss . Intangible Assets Being purely digital in nature , cryptocurrencies may meet the definition of “ intangible assets ” under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS . Cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin generally have indefinite useful lives with no expiration date or limit on the period in which they can be exchanged for cash , goods , or services . Under U.S. GAAP , indefinite-lived intangibles are initially measured at cost and need to be tested for impairment annually . A decline below cost as quoted on a cryptocurrency exchange may be considered an event indicative of impairment . IFRS allows for intangible assets to be accounted for either at cost or revaluation at “ fair value at the date of the revaluation less any subsequent … accumulated impairment losses. ” The revaluation model can only be applied if the fair value can be determined by reference to an active market , defined as “ a market in which transactions for the asset or liability take place with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis. ” What ’ s Next Cryptocurrencies may meet the definition of an intangible asset , with potential circumstances for inventory or investment accounting by an investment company . The relevant accounting standards , however , were written before the birth of blockchain and cryptoassets and thus do not provide for their unique economic makeup . Careful consideration should therefore be given to the facts and circumstances of each cryptoasset case after consulting with advisors who understand their intricacies . The author implores FASB and the IASB to provide authoritative guidance that specifically addresses the recognition , measurement , presentation , and disclosure requirements for this dynamic new asset class .
The Taxation of Cryptocurrency Virtual Transactions Bring Real-Life Tax Implications Bitcoin and several rival forms of cryptocurrency experienced record-breaking growth in recent years , leaving many investors and their CPAs grappling with uncertainty and surprise during tax season . Many returns were put on extension , awaiting further guidance from the IRS , while other taxpayers found themselves faced with an unexpectedly large tax bill as a result of misconceptions surrounding how these transactions are taxed . Cryptocurrency is digital currency that uses encryption techniques , rather than a central bank , to generate , exchange , and transfer units of currency . Unlike cash transactions , no bank or government authority verifies the transfer of funds . Instead , these virtual transactions are recorded in a digitized public ledger called a “ blockchain. ” Individual units of the currency are called “ coins. ” Introduced in 2009 , Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency and remains the most widely used . Other forms have grown tremendously in popularity since then , including Litecoin , Ethereum , and Ripple . While cryptocurrency exchanges have experienced booms and busts in the market , experts predict the use of cryptocurrency will continue to increase , making it imperative that CPAs are prepared to understand and educate their clients on the tax implications of these virtual transactions . IRS Treatment of Cryptocurrency The IRS addressed the taxation of cryptocurrency transactions in Notice 2014-21 , which provides that cryptocurrency is treated as property for federal tax purposes . Therefore , general tax principles that apply to property transactions must be applied to exchanges of cryptocurrencies as well . Notice 2014-21 holds that taxpayers must recognize gain or loss on the exchange of cryptocurrency for cash or for other property . Accordingly , gain or loss is recognized every time that cryptocurrency is sold or used to purchase goods or services . How the gain or loss is recognized depends largely on the type of transaction conducted and the length of time the position was held . Settled for cash . Cryptocurrency gains from trading coins held as capital assets are treated as investment income by the IRS , and the same capital gains rules apply . A taxpayer who sells a coin position for cash must report a capital gain on Form 8949 . A coin position held for one year or less is considered a short-term capital gain , taxed at ordinary tax rates ; a position held for more than one year is considered a long-term capital gain . As with stock trades , capital losses offset capital gains in full , and a net capital loss is limited to $ 3,000 ( $ 1,500 for married taxpayers filing separately ) against other types of income on an individual tax return . An excess capital loss is carried forward to the subsequent tax year . Under IRS rules , the default for stock transactions is the first-in , first-out ( FIFO ) method of accounting . Under certain circumstances , however , specific identification is allowed . The use of specific identification can drastically reduce the recognized gain on cryptocurrency transactions , since many traders have multiple transactions in the same form of cryptocurrency . While some tax preparers have attempted to use specific identification when reporting cryptocurrency gains , this represents an aggressive approach for two reasons . First , although Notice 2014-21 refers to cryptocurrency as property , it does not—on face value—refer to it as a stock . Second , it is doubtful that an “ adequate identification ” could ever be made with respect to cryptocurrency . The coin being traded is represented by an entry in a distributed ledger held by various parties . Furthermore , it can be divided into an infinite number of parts , and thus lacks any sort of lot number . Without being able to establish adequate identification , FIFO may be the only permissible method . General tax principles that apply to property transactions must be applied to exchanges of cryptocurrencies as well . The gain is also considered investment income for purposes of the Medicare contributions tax introduced in the Affordable Care Act . As a result , taxpayers with modified adjusted gross incomes over $ 200,000 ( $ 250,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly ) are subject to the 3.8 % additional Medicare tax on cryptocurrency gains . Exchanged for other cryptocurrencies . Taxpayers who make coin-to-coin trades ( e.g. , Bitcoin to Ethereum ) may mistakenly assume there is no tax liability because they did not receive any actual funds . Given the IRS ’ s treatment of cryptocurrency as property , however , cryptocurrency trades are subject to the same capital gains and losses rules as all other property exchanges . Some taxpayers and preparers have attempted to delay capital gains income on cryptocurrency-to-cryptocurrency trades by classifying the trades as Internal Revenue Code ( IRC ) section 1031 like-kind exchanges , whereby they can defer income to the replacement position ’ s cost basis . Prior to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ( TCJA ) , it was possible to argue that cryptocurrency could qualify , but there were inherent problems in the applicability of IRC section 1031 to these trades , since they may have failed to meet certain requirements . For example , the currencies are not necessarily “ like-kind ” properties . In addition , reporting such trades under IRC section 1031 must be done properly , using Form 8824 and listing every trade . The TCJA made this debate moot by limiting 1031 like-kind exchanges to real property , not for sale ; starting with tax year 2018 , therefore , this treatment of cryptocurrencies will no longer be even theoretically viable . Cryptocurrency mining . Investors can earn cryptocurrency by using computers to solve a complex mathematical puzzle . As a reward for solving the puzzle , they receive newly “ minted ” coins . Notice 2014-21 states that when a taxpayer successfully mines a cryptocurrency , the fair market value of the coins mined is includible in gross income . Furthermore , an individual whose mining operations constitute a trade or business is subject to self-employment tax on the income derived from those activities . The amount of this income equals the market price of the coins on the day they were awarded on the blockchain . This amount also becomes the miner ’ s basis in the coins going forward and is used to calculate future gains and losses . Example . An investor mines one Bitcoin in 2013 . On the day it was mined , the market price of Bitcoin was $ 1,000 . The investor has $ 1,000 of taxable income in 2013 . Going forward , the basis in that Bitcoin is $ 1,000 . If the investor later sells it for $ 1,200 , there is a taxable gain of $ 200 ( $ 1,200 − $ 1,000 ) . Payment for goods and services . Notice 2014-21 also provides guidance on the taxation of cryptocurrency that is received as employee wages , independent contractor payments for services provided , and other payments for goods or services . Wages paid to employees in cryptocurrency are taxable to the employee and must be reported on Form W-2 . The employee is taxed at the fair market value of the cryptocurrency . Payments made to independent contractors for services provided using cryptocurrency are subject to income tax and self-employment tax and must be reported on Form 1099 . Again , the fair market value of the cryptocurrency establishes the taxable amount . Thus , any taxpayer who receives cryptocurrency as payment for goods or services , either as an employee or an independent contractor , must include the fair market value of the cryptocurrency in his reported taxable income . Coin hard forks ( chain splits ) . A hard fork occurs when there is a split in a cryptocurrency ’ s blockchain . Bitcoin had a hard fork in its blockchain on August 1 , 2017 , dividing into two separate coins : Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash . Each holder of a Bitcoin unit was entitled to one Bitcoin Cash unit . Similarly , Litecoin , the fifth-largest cryptocurrency , had a hard fork—Litecoin Cash—in February 2018 . The IRS has not provided guidance on hard fork transactions , and tax experts and coin traders are still debating its tax treatment . Common questions include : Is a hard fork the same as a stock split ? If so , does the value of the coins have to be divided between the original coin and the fork , or is it a taxable dividend ? Compounding this issue is the fact that coin holders might not be able to sell the new fork currency immediately . The cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase , for example , did not support Bitcoin Cash when it originally forked in August 2017 , but did add it to accounts for rightful holders later that year . Is it therefore acceptable to defer income on the fork transaction until the coin holder obtains such access , or later sells the new , forked coins ? It seems reasonable to assume that coin traders should not have to report taxable income on a hard fork until the new coin is time-stamped as a ledger entry in the blockchain . Donating cryptocurrency . Instead of selling the cryptocurrency and donating the after-tax proceeds , a taxpayer can donate it directly to a charity . This approach provides significant benefits : the tax deduction will be equal to the fair market value of the donated coins ( as determined by a qualified appraisal ) , and the donor will not pay tax on the gain . This also results in a larger donation because , instead of paying capital gains taxes , the charity will receive the full value of the donation . For this strategy to work , the coins must have been held for longer than one year . Fidelity Charitable , a donor-advised fund , reported receiving over $ 69 million in cryptocurrency contributions in 2017 ( ) . IRS Enforcement Despite the uncertainty and lack of guidance in some major areas of cryptocurrency taxation , the IRS is taking an aggressive stance on taxpayers who have not complied with the reporting requirements issued in 2014 . Based on a report from the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration ( TIGTA ) in August 2017 , the IRS announced concern over “ massive ” underreporting of income generated by cryptocurrencies . The report included specific compliance issues and tax guidance for cryptocurrency investors . This course of action suggests the IRS will aggressively pursue enforcement of compliance in cryptocurrency transactions . The IRS went as far as to issue a “ John Doe ” summons to Coinbase , one of the largest cryptocurrency exchanges , requesting the release of transactions from 2013 to 2015 . On November 28 , 2017 , the Federal District Court for the Northern District of California entered an order requiring Coinbase to provide the IRS with data on many of its clients who engaged in transactions exceeding $ 20,000 ; Coinbase added the tax reporting of capital gains and losses to this information . This course of action suggests the IRS will aggressively pursue enforcement of compliance in cryptocurrency transactions . To date , however , no exchanges are required to report cryptocurrency transactions on Form 1099-B . Questions Remain The IRS ’ s guidance in Notice 2014-21 clarifies various aspects of the tax treatment of cryptocurrency transactions , but many questions remain unanswered , such as how cryptocurrencies should be treated for international tax reporting [ e.g. , Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts ( FBAR ) & Foreign Accounts and Tax Compliance Act ( FATCA ) reporting ] and whether cryptocurrency trades prior to 2018 are subject to the like-kind exchange rules . Cryptocurrency appears to be here for the long term , and thus the scrutiny surrounding its reporting will continue to intensify . It behooves CPAs—especially those whose clients maintain positions in one or more cryptocurrencies—to keep abreast of the evolving regulatory picture surrounding this new kind of asset .
The Coming World of Blockchain A Primer for Accountants and Auditors In Brief Blockchain came to mainstream attention in 2017 , despite having existed for almost a decade prior . The author explains how this new technology , perhaps best known for its role in enabling cryptocurrencies , works . In his view , blockchain has the potential to change the way the world does business , and its impact is being vastly underestimated by the accounting profession and society at large . * * * Cryptocurrencies have become a prevailing topic of conversation , even among the most novice investors . While Bitcoin and Ethereum are the most well-known , few people realize that there are currently more than 1,600 different cryptocurrencies . Even fewer realize that their underlying technology—blockchain—may be a far more meaningful disruptor in the financial sector than cryptocurrencies themselves . What is Blockchain ? Blockchain , a form of distributed ledger technology ( DLT ) , is essentially a decentralized , trustless , openly auditable ledger that can be shared and viewed by all users . The genesis of the technology is still being debated , but most would say that blockchain coalesced in the midst of the 2008 global financial crisis . Many cryptography enthusiasts in the San Francisco Bay area had become tired of the centralized nature of the banking system and started discussing over online forums ways to shift trust from the centralized authorities . In November 2008 , a person or persons writing as “ Satoshi Nakamoto ” published a now-famous white paper focusing on a peer-to-peer electronic cash payment system . The white paper offered insight into how this technology could be used to replace centralized financial institutions , and it was first known to be implemented in January 2009 . Traditional banking and business is centralized , meaning the ledger indicating who owns what or who owes whom is kept on a private database and relies on the overseeing body of the database to keep the records safe and accurate . Therefore , the system depends upon people ’ s trust that the bank or business is keeping proper track of the ins and outs of users ’ money and information . Any failures with this single source of authority could mean trouble , especially since many people are unaware of actual banking laws and what the banks do with money once users deposit into their accounts . Prior to the 2008 crisis , few thought that banks were being reckless or questioned the risky lending choices they made with users ’ money . People also didn ’ t think that the banks would need a $ 7.7 trillion taxpayer bailout—more than half the value of everything produced that year . These breaches of financial trust , as well as the notable hacks in recent years that have gained access to millions of users ’ sensitive personal information , have brought much-needed scrutiny to the inner workings of the financial system . Ledgers keep track of how humans interact with each other ; without them there would be no accountability in global trade . Blockchain is an immutable distributed ledger that is shared among a set of databases or nodes . Individual ledgers keep track of informational changes that are then fully synced to all databases within the blockchain to ensure that they all have the most recent ledger . This consistent third-party validated ledger is open , searchable , and virtually fraud-proof . The entire user population is consistently validating information , ensuring that it is accurate and up to date . Within a given blockchain there are multiple individuals ( or nodes ) confirming transactions and ensuring the accuracy of the distributed ledger . This is done by sharing one overall database among many nodes . Furthermore , blockchain databases do not have the limitations of more traditional databases and can keep a running log of every transaction ever made on the system . Within a given blockchain there are multiple individuals ( or nodes ) confirming transactions and ensuring the accuracy of the distributed ledger . Blockchain Simplified A very basic example demonstrating the use of blockchain is illustrated below ; the more technical aspects are broken down in greater detail in further sections . There are many nuances to each blockchain regarding recommended confirmations , protocols , and consensus mechanisms . In addition , as blockchain is best know for its use in conjunction with cryptocurrencies , this example utilizes those terms ; other paradigms may be used when blockchain is applied to accounting and auditing procedures . At the most basic level , blockchains work by incentivizing parties to agree on any given transaction ’ s authenticity . Transactions are organized and grouped together into “ blocks ” that are presented to the blockchain for authentication . The creation of these blocks is called “ mining , ” and miners are incentivized by a reward of native tokens ( i.e. , brand new coins that had not previously existed ) . Once a block obtains enough confirmations , the transaction is considered to be validated and have been placed on the blockchain as the next sequential block . At this juncture , it is important to note that all blockchains have varying levels of confirmation requirements ; Bitcoin ’ s blockchain requires six confirmations , while Ethereum ’ s requires 30 . A confirmation is essentially the node agreeing on the authenticity of all transactions within the newly created block and the underlying chain , and this process is completed every time a block is created . Suppose Company A wants to purchase $ 500 worth of goods from Company B ; this purchase is grouped with other transactions into one block on the blockchain . The vendor and other parties within the blockchain are then notified of a payment for $ 500 in exchange for the goods . This transaction is then confirmed by prerequired number of nodes within the blockchain , and the $ 500 is moved from the customer ’ s bank account to the vendor ’ s . If there are not enough confirmations—meaning not enough parties can agree that these transactions are accurate—the block is not validated , and the transaction is not executed . There are two major types of consensus protocols by which miners operate : proof of work ( POW ) and proof of stake ( POS ) . Both have advantages and disadvantages , but are roughly equal in reliability . Proof of work . POW confirms transactions by having miners compete to solve mathematical equations to create new blocks and confirm transactions . These equations are not easily solved and have varying levels of difficulty , depending on the demand and load of the blockchain ( i.e. , volume of transactions ) and number of miners currently mining . Miners solve the equations through brute force , throwing as much computing power as possible at the problem until it is solved . The first node to solve the equation receives the reward of native currency , places the block in sequence , and confirms the transaction . Some of the most famous cryptocurrencies use the POW mechanism , such as Bitcoin , Ethereum , and Litecoin . Bitcoin ’ s protocol regulates the difficulty of the equation in such a way that miners are only able to create blocks roughly every 10 minutes , which leads to an approximately one-hour wait time for transactions to go through under a normal transaction volume . Scalability issues arise when volume spikes , however , as in late 2017 and early 2018 , when some transactions took days to go through . This is because blocks can only hold a finite amount of data ; when demand becomes too large , transactions must wait in a queue to be placed in the next block . Fees are also added to each transaction to entice miners to add a given user ’ s transaction to the next block ; when demand increases , so do the fees . In late 2017 , fees reached into the $ 20 range . This can be disadvantageous when wanting to use Bitcoin for a minor purchase ; this is a major issue for the adoption of Bitcoin as an everyday medium of exchange . With the amount of computing power and time needed to process transactions using the POW protocol , Bitcoin is beginning to struggle to scale in the global economy . One other notable drawback to POW is wasted energy from nonawarded miners . It is estimated that , to process one transaction on Bitcoin ’ s blockchain , enough energy is consumed to power a house for one week ( Christopher Malmo , “ One Bitcoin Transaction Now Uses as Much Energy as Your House in a Week , ” Motherboard , Nov. 1 , 2017 , ) . POW does , however , provide greater decentralization and liquidity than POS because miners are constantly competing to validate blocks and are incentivized to do so . Proof of stake . POS , which is growing in popularity due to its scalability and environmental friendliness , overcomes the need for massive computing power and energy consumption by foregoing the process of having miners compete to solve mathematical equations . Instead , POS protocols select miners to present blocks by allowing them to “ stake ” a portion of their native coins to the network . It works like a lottery system whereby each coin held by an individual represents a lottery ticket . The POS protocol will randomly choose a validator from the entire pool of staking miners , with the winner being rewarded with the ability to place the next block in sequence ( “ minting ” ) and more native tokens . The greater number of coins staked , the higher the chances of minting the next block . While POS is less decentralized and may lead to the “ rich getting richer , ” it does allow for a more stable network , since any bad act by a miner would cause that miner to lose tokens . Every POS blockchain has its own required minimum tokens for staking or obtaining a “ masternode. ” Masternodes are different from regular nodes in that they keep the full copy of the blockchain , in real time , and are always up and running . Masternodes have higher authority and are mostly obtained for governance power within the blockchain . Obtaining a masternode is much more difficult than normal staking ; miners typically must stake a significantly greater portion of native coins , open a virtual private server ( VPS ) , and have significant amounts of storage space to house the entire blockchain . Once a masternode is obtained , however , the rewards are much higher and more regular . Masternodes typically receive recurring payouts in native coins , almost like getting interest on a loan . The theory is that these masternodes bring greater stability to the network by disincentivizing individuals with significant numbers of tokens ( whales ) from manipulating the market by dumping massive amounts at one time . Cryptography and the Blockchain Cryptography is a practice that has been used throughout history . Julius Caesar used cryptography to send private correspondence by substituting a given letter with a different one ( i.e. , “ A ” represented by “ D , ” “ B ” by “ E ” ) . The cryptography used in blockchain is , naturally , much more complex . Each transaction presented to the blockchain is first turned into a cryptographically secured hash , a fixed-length alphanumeric string that is then used by the blockchain as an identifier for transactions . These hashes are based on public and private keys , which are generated by individuals using the blockchain . A private key is like a digital signature that is unique to each individual ; a public key is a derivative of an individual ’ s private key that is broadcasted to the public whenever transactions are to be made , but it is not accessible without the private key . Public keys , often referred to as “ wallets , ” can also vary in levels of anonymity . Bitcoin public keys are quasi-anonymous and act more like a pseudonym that keeps the individual ’ s identity private only to the extent that the individual does not reveal his true identity . These links play an important role in the immutability of a blockchain , which prevents bad actors from changing the data on the ledger by themselves . Once the transaction is hashed , it is grouped together with other transactions into a block and validated by the blockchain using agreed-upon consensus protocols . Each validated block also contains a link to the previous block , which includes a link to the block before that , and so on ; the linked blocks form the blockchain . This linking also allows users to trace transactions back to the initial genesis block . Once a block is created and validated by the blockchain , it can never be destroyed or altered unless 51 % of the blockchain agrees and determines change is needed . Within mature ecosystems like Bitcoin ’ s blockchain , this type of coordination would require massive global efforts , rendering hacking an actual blockchain virtually impossible . Since , however , obtaining 51 % consensus is more possible within new ecosystems , many emerging cryptocurrencies are opting to “ airdrop ” tokens ; that is , send native tokens , typically in small amounts , to anyone who wants them and has a compatible wallet . This spreads the cryptocurrency rapidly and incentivizes a larger pool of users to promote and use the blockchain , which in turn diminishes the likelihood of any one bad actor obtaining 51 % . As noted above , each block contains a link to the previous block before it , thus creating a chain of blocks anchored by the genesis block . These links play an important role in the immutability of a blockchain , which prevents bad actors from changing the data on the ledger by themselves . This is imperative for the integrity of the blockchain and the backbone for why it is reliable and accurate . Users can have full confidence that transactions on the blockchain are as indicated with no falsification . Blockchains refresh whenever confirmations occur , which is , on average , multiple times an hour . The entire chain is resynced to ensure accuracy and any conflicts are resolved , automatically and on a regulated basis . When a refresh happens , all extinct blocks—those that did not attain the required minimum confirmations to be validated by the blockchain—fall off the chain , and only the longest chain is left standing . Extinct blocks are also created when two miners present blocks at the same time ; only the block created most quickly is placed on the blockchain . In summation , only properly validated blocks are linked to the genesis block , and the genesis block is the anchor of the main chain . When a refresh happens , the only blocks left are the ones connected on the main chain . Exhibit 1 illustrates the refresh process . Exhibit 1 Blockchain Refresh Process Blockchains use the longest chain rule to prevent double spending , which is one reason governments and financial institutions are currently centralized . These institutions regulate the issuance of money and enforce laws for bad actors who falsely create more money than has been authorized . Prior to the creation of blockchain , double spending was a hindrance to the proliferation of digital currencies ; similar to printing counterfeit money , bad actors could copy and paste digital money like data in an Excel spreadsheet . With blockchain , however , bad actors need 51 % consensus to get enough confirmations for the double spend to be validated by the blockchain . For POW , the bad actor would need 51 % of the hashing power , which for Bitcoin would be impossible due to the sheer energy consumption and computing requirements . For POS , the bad actor would need 51 % of all coins in existence ; while this might be possible for immature blockchains , it would not be beneficial to the bad actor , who would be damaging his own stake in the long run . Centralized , Decentralized , and Distributed Networks Proponents of blockchain technology frequently describe it as “ decentralized. ” A more accurate description , however , might be “ decentralizing and becoming more distributed. ” What is the difference ? Centralized networks store and send data through a single database or server , which is responsible for ensuring that the information sent is properly relayed to the end user . Decentralized networks look more like clusters of centralized networks , with each centralized cluster transmitting information not only within itself but to other clusters as well ; therefore , the clusters rely on each other somewhat as shared information sources . Distributed networks do not have a centralized database or server , and there is no information storage . Each node contains information and is connected to many other nodes ; the data is transmitted to the end user by traveling through whichever nodes offer the quickest path . Centralized networks have a single point of failure , so removing or disrupting the central node could cause mass failure throughout the network ; this is perhaps their biggest flaw . On the other hand , because there is only one source of data , centralized networks are much easier to maintain . Centralized networks also tend to have a much faster rate of development and implementation once a process is determined . Despite the seemingly beneficial aspects of centralized networks , on a global scale these benefits can slow the development of ideas and processes , limit the scalability of the network , and compromise the stability of the network . When a single framework is followed , real diversity is stifled . From a distance , decentralized networks resemble distributed networks , but closer inspection reveals that they are in fact a distributed group of centralized networks—the more distributed they are , the more difficult maintenance becomes , but the higher the level of scalability and stability . Failure in a single node of a distributed network will not render the network useless ; instead , the data finds a different route to the end user , bypassing the failed node . Implementation of decentralized or distributed networks is much more complicated than centralized networks , with distributed networks being the most arduous , due to the enormous foundation required to support such a global infrastructure . Once established , however , distributed networks have the potential to evolve at a tremendous rate . Networks that house ledgers containing information to be used on a global scale tend more towards decentralized and distributed over centralized . Blockchain is built on a decentralized ledger , which is one of the main reasons why it is so disruptive . As mentioned above , current economic conditions require that a central authority keep the ledgers of the world in check and balance , but blockchain relies on peer-to-peer authentication and agreement . Trust is transferred from a central authority to a majority authority , under the assumption that the majority can not all be wrong . Why Now ? In 1908 , the first Model T was completed ; by 1927 , the Ford Motor Company had built more than 15 million Model Ts and disrupted the transportation industry forever . This disruption was due to the convergence of the invention of the combustion engine , a drop in the price of steel , and Henry Ford ’ s innovation of the assembly line . Disruptive technologies never have any single catalyst ; rather , they are the result of many technologies and trends coinciding . Bitcoin and blockchain technology have been around for nearly a decade , finally garnering mainstream media attention at the end of 2017 . The growing rate of distrust in the world ’ s financial and governmental institutions following the 2008 crisis made people more open to trying a different system . Time was needed , however , to cultivate the foundational technology for initial distributed networks as well as secondary technologies such as smartphones and big data . Today there are areas where , even though clean running water is still a dream , the inhabitants still have smartphone connections powered by small solar panels attached to the roofs of their huts ( Phoebe Parke , “ More Africans Have Access to Cell Phone Service than Piped Water , ” CNN.com , Jan. 19 , 2016 , ) . Imagine these unbanked regions with the full power of a global economy powered by blockchain . Exhibit 2 Centralized , Decentralized , and Distributed Networks Blockchain Use Cases Detailed below are some issues that new emerging blockchain technologies are trying to solve . This listing is in no way exhaustive , nor are any of the native tokens associated with the blockchains promoted or endorsed in the given examples . This listing is meant to illustrate the application of the above concepts as they pertain to the real world . Cross-border payments . Moving money from one country to another is currently done on archaic payment rails , supported by the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications ( Swift ) . These payment rails require users to pay extremely high fees and wait three to five ( or more ) days for the transfer of funds to be completed . With information moving so freely , the general population expects its money to move freely as well . Ripple , a blockchain company in San Francisco , is utilizing DLT to create what it calls the Internet of value ( IOV ) . With this technology , users can send any amount of money anywhere in the world at a fraction of a cent in fees . This company has partnered with over 100 banks , and the technology is currently being used by a handful of financial institutions like Santander Banco , Moneygram , and Western Union , with many more in the pilot phase . This company also offers another product that utilizes its native cryptocurrency to source liquidity from exchanges when moving money from one country to another . Using existing technology , when a person wants to send money across borders , domestic banks must source their own liquidity at the foreign bank ; that is , the bank sending money to a foreign bank must maintain dormant capital at the correspondent bank in a Nostro account . These accounts are denominated in the foreign currency as a way to hedge exchange fluctuations and facilitate the settlement of foreign exchange and trade transactions ; they hold trillions of dollars that sit dormant , require banks to pay fees , and are subject to regular compliance testing . With DLT and the native cryptocurrencies , these Nostro accounts would be obsolete , and the dormant capital could be freed up for other , more productive uses . Assume that Bob wants to send $ 100 to his sister Jane in Japan . Using DLT , Bob can initiate the transfer to Jane , who will receive a notification of the amount of USD being sent in real time and the equivalent amount of Yen using current exchange rates . Once the transaction is confirmed , the 100 USD is immediately converted into the native cryptocurrency at a U.S. exchange and then converted into Yen at a local Japanese exchange , then delivered to Jane . Accounting . As a CPA , this author has seen firsthand the issues companies run into when closing books at month- or year-end . Issues often arise with reconciling items or properly reflecting GAAP standards . This can be very time consuming and require overemployment of accounting personnel to service this need . In addition , auditing techniques still require either written confirmation of year-end accounts receivables or physical inspection of invoices or subsequent payments to ensure that balances exist . With blockchain technology , the need to examine physical documents will be replaced by downloading the transaction history from the blockchain . As addressed above , transactions on the blockchain are immutable and can never be changed once validated . To prove that company A owes company B , an auditor can simply look on the blockchain and have full comfort in knowing that the amount owed to company B is proper and complete . Request Network , a blockchain company in London , is implementing blockchain technology that allows users to request payment when buying items online . An entry is made to the blockchain that records what is owed by and to whom , essentially creating an accounts receivable and accounts payable entry to the distributed ledger . It is apparent this would be of great benefit to auditors and accountants alike . Moreover , this company is also building a user interface for auditors that would allow for what it calls “ smart audits. ” These smart audits would eliminate the need for traditional auditing techniques and allow audits to be done more efficiently , thus reducing audit times and allowing the auditor to focus more on advising clients . The company has recently partnered with PricewaterhouseCoopers of France and plans more partnerships as the technology emerges . Logistics . Shipping products from one place to another is crucial for the global economy ; however , the shipping of products is inefficient . The FBI estimates that approximately $ 27 billion was lost due to cargo theft in 2016 ( “ Cargo Theft , 2016 , ” ) . In addition , communication between carriers , tracking across carriers , and the practice of 50 % markups all need to be drastically improved . These inefficiencies are being mitigated by Shipchain , a blockchain company that utilizes DLT to render communication and tracking transparent , allowing every step of the supply chain to be documented . The company also incentivizes carriers with its native cryptocurrency for using the most efficient routes and delivering goods on time . By putting the supply chain on the blockchain , records will never be altered , communication will be open , and tracking will be transparent . Governmental records . The U.S. government , the gatekeeper for voter registration , identities , and even ownership of property , is one of the world ’ s largest central authorities ; citizens must use government resources and deal with bureaucratic red tape to initiate , maintain , and obtain specified records . Several companies , however , are now vying to put voter registration , deeds , and identities on the blockchain , which would allow users to carry all their personal records with them at any time . Users could log in with facial or thumbprint recognition on their smart-phones and have access to personal documents . This has the potential to reduce the risk of identity theft and decrease the wait time for property deeds . Imagine a world where value flows like information over the Internet , or where neighbors trade energy generated from solar panels among themselves without a centralized authority setting the price . Blockchain is creating this world , and while the change is massively disruptive , this author believes it will ultimately be for the better . Just as the Internet changed the way the world viewed information , blockchain will change the way people view trust .
Blockchain Basics and Hands-on Guidance Taking the Next Step toward Implementation and Adoption and In Brief Since blockchain technology entered the mainstream in 2017 , many have questioned its purpose and capabilities . What is blockchain ? How does it work ? What are its implications for the accounting profession ? The author attempts to answer these and other questions , providing an entry point for interested professionals and demonstrating how this new technology could change the face of accounting and auditing in coming years . * * * Much has been written about blockchain technology and the cryptocurrency applications that run on it , making it difficult for interested parties to know where to begin . Furthermore , many of the articles , publications , and discussions about blockchain are written at a high technical level ; there are precious few step-by-step guides or discussions of real-world applications . This article provides CPAs with jargon-free , hands-on guidance on how to adapt to and successfully leverage blockchain technology in accounting and advisory services . Technology and Accounting Blockchain technology may seem arcane at first , but accounting professionals have been using technological platforms to improve upon and add to services offered for decades . Microsoft Excel , various enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) platforms , and the digitization of accounting information and processes have been used in accounting for years ; blockchain is simply the next tool to be incorporated into the profession ’ s toolbox . Regardless of whether a CPA works in public practice , private industry , or academia , being able to understand , utilize , and implement blockchain will be increasingly essential . With many organizations , including the Big Four , already implementing blockchain prototypes , it is increasingly evident that blockchain is an important for accountants across industry lines . The technology has important implications for accounting information systems ( AIS ) , specifically how information is consolidated and communicated from operations to end users . It is also important that the fundamental differences between different blockchain options are understood and applied to the business landscape . The Basics of Blockchain Blockchain is a decentralized ledger system developed by a person or persons working under the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto in October 2008 to facilitate Bitcoin trading . Nakamoto designed blockchain to solve the problem of duplicate spending in cybercurrencies , to enable exchanges in a low-trust environment without a third party , to create a distributed ledger of transactions that is robust against failure , and to provide an immutable audit trail . It has also been suggested that Nakamoto proposed blockchain as a response to the global financial crisis of 2008 , in which the banks , through their capacity as third-party intermediaries , threatened the viability of the entire global financial system . Put simply , blockchain is a decentralized database that enables real-time verification and communication of information . A helpful analogy may be to think of blockchain as a gigantic Google document accessible to network members , with some members granted different levels of access , and augmented with cryptography and other security tools to protect and secure information . The “ block ” and “ chain ” components are connected , and together form the basis that supports cryptocurrencies . Akin to how certain traditional ledger entries ( e.g , payables ) are batched to streamline internal processes , individual records and transactions are batched into blocks . Each block contains a cryptographic hash that is both unique to that block and chains it to the immediately preceding block of information . This connection , cemented by the hash IDs and time stamp associated with each block , is the virtual glue that connects the blocks and forms the blockchain . Any alteration of the ledger or an individual block will make the code inoperable and thus would be detectable . To date , no blockchain has been breached or hacked , although several cryptocurrency platforms have suffered breaches , reinforcing the importance of robust password security and protocols . Digging further down , each block is a mathematical cryptographic code recording the most recent transaction . As soon as a block completes the required information and is verified , any additional information or ensuing events chronologically link to that first block by becoming a subsequent block , in a chain-like fashion—hence the name “ blockchain. ” When a block is completed , it also creates a unique secure hash code , which connects it to the next block . The block also contains the Merkle Root of the transaction that it represents—a mathematical process used to organize multiple events in a more manageable fashion . The Merkle Root in a blockchain is a derivative of the hashes from the current block and a prespecified number of previous blocks or a prespecified time ( this is unique for each chain ) . Exhibit 1 illustrates a simple blockchain . Exhibit 1 Summary View of a Blockchain A block can represent the latest cryptocurrency exchange , a derivatives market trade , a payment made on a loan , a vote , or any contract . Each block is linked to a prespecified number of previous blocks , identifies all of the information contained within , and is verified before being added to the chain , without an outside third party controlling the process . In the blockchain , each user or “ node ” possesses a complete record of the entire blockchain , and each transaction must be approved by a majority or a consensus of the users . The verification process can be computationally expensive , depending on the number of verifying members ( called “ nodes ” ) and the number of blocks in the hash . In Bitcoin , for example , the current verification time is 10 minutes for each transaction . This feature provides the tamper-proof nature of most blockchains ; the block contents can not be revised by the nodes , and the chain can not be altered once the block has been approved and added . The chain propagates in one chronological direction , but it can be audited and read in both directions . It is important to note that the verification process can be customized depending upon the blockchain option selected . The verification process consists of nodes that have volunteered to be verifiers confirming , via complicated mathematical association and problem solving , that the hash IDs and information referenced via those hash IDs are authentic . While this verification is difficult to achieve initially , once it has been approved , other nodes can verify it in short order . No individual node possesses more power than another node or permissioned user . A proof-of-work verification protocol requires only a single node to submit a solution to an algorithmic problem—something that is very difficult to achieve but easy to verify once accomplished . This is the methodology used in both the Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains , but it consumes more electricity than other options , reducing its applicability for large-scale implementation . In contrast , a proof-of-stake protocol uses a lottery system to decide which nodes ( i.e. , permissioned members of the blockchain ) will approve the transactions and information in question . The probability of being selected for approving transactions and information depends upon the stake held by the organization or individual in question ; for cryptocurrencies , this equals the number of Bitcoins or other altcoins held . While this may result in some of the larger stakeholders having outsize approval control over entries and blocks , these large stakeholders are also equally vested in the success and veracity of the network . The last protocol used is proof of elapsed time , which assigns a random model to determine who will approve the block of pending information . The node with the shortest wait time wins the lottery , but will have to wait a certain amount of time before approving additional blocks . Note that , in order to utilize the proof of elapsed time , the nodes involved must run Intel Software Guard Extension ( Intel SGX ) ; because it is not feasible for many users to possess the expertise to incorporate Intel SGX , much of the Blockchain community uses the proof-of-work protocol . Real World Applications How does blockchain apply to real world auditing and accounting practice ? Consider the hypothetical example of Top Dollar CPA , a midsize accounting firm that has set up a private blockchain organized by the firm , with its largest 20 audit clients as members of the network . Instead of manually confirming outstanding receivables , which can add days to the audit process and create a mountain of emails and other information that can get lost in the shuffle , blockchain enables this process to be done on a nearly instantaneous basis . As blocks of data are verified and added onto the blockchain , they are confirmed and verified on a continuous basis by network members . Specifically , confirmations can be augmented , improved , or even rendered unnecessary by the implementation of a private blockchain environment . A core functionality of blockchain is that every member of the network can audit the blockchain and is thus aware of the terms , conditions , information , and agreements between counterparties . Therefore , if counterparties are aware of who owes money to whom , and the conditions of those payments , this could certainly change the process by which receivables are examined and confirmed . It is important to note that this private network , consisting only of known , approved members , is integral to this approach . Consider another example in which ABC Company sells goods to XYZ Company . Howard LaFarb , a CPA at ABC , has always used a general ledger in QuickBooks to track ABC ’ s sales with XYZ ; all he typically needs to do to determine ABC ’ s status is to look at the most recent closing balance after the sale . With blockchain , however , a closing balance does not exist , and calculating the final balance of XYZ ’ s account means going backward through the general ledger from the most recent block to the very first transaction . He can , however , use a special blockchain developed for accounting , such as Balanc3 by ConsenSys or Libra Enterprise Platform , where double-entry accounting becomes a triple-entry ledger due to the participation of the blockchain in every accounting transaction . The benefit for both companies is that both parties can view the transaction at any time and agree that it is accurate ; the benefit for Howard is that the numbers can not be altered and he has to spend much less time reconciling accounts and verifying numbers . The transactions can not be altered in any way , thereby greatly reducing the possibility of cutoff and reliability issues , not to mention making it harder to cook the books . As blocks of data are verified and added onto the blockchain , they are confirmed and verified on a continuous basis by network members . Verifying payroll information , including hours , salary , and fringe benefits , can be accomplished in the same manner and can be customized depending on the members of the network . For example , suppose that Steve Adams , CPA , also prepares payroll for 20 clients . Currently he spends at least one day a week using ADP software and client-provided data to generate the payments ; he must verify hours , salaries , various withholdings , and any special payments for the employees . If Steve switches to using a private blockchain for each client , wherein all the third parties are permissioned participants , he will spend perhaps one or two hours a week performing verifications , as the 20 blockchains are autonomously enforcing the predetermined requirements of the payroll process as “ smart contracts. ” A smart contract is , in essence , a series of “ if , then ” statements and agreements that have been agreed to by all parties involved ; thus , embedding this information on a blockchain platform is not far-fetched . While the Ethereum blockchain has taken the lead in this regard , there will inevitably be other options that arise over time . Implementing a blockchain platform may seem like a departure from normal business procedures , especially when it comes to sensitive information such as employee salary and healthcare information . That said , to date no blockchain has been hacked , and if private blockchains are implemented , different clients can store information with their CPAs on individual private networks , which would prevent any accidental disclosure of confidential information . Note , however , that both parties in a business relationship would have to both implement blockchain and be a part of the same network after implementation . Cryptocurrencies are traded on public blockchains , which secures them , but other associated information may be stored behind regular security protocols . Another thing to keep in mind is that blockchain is software that can be installed on computers , laptops , individual servers , or server farms if so desired . Most blockchain software options are priced and operated much like other software , with some freely available ( the Bitcoin blockchain ) , others charging fees for each piece of data added ( Factom ) , and others built exclusively for commercial use ( Ripple ) . As with any other software , there are always risks when downloading different blockchain platforms , such malware , viruses , and other malicious software programs . Over time , a mature market for blockchain software platforms will likely develop , with competitors offering different value propositions . As noted above , several platforms where cryptocurrencies are traded have suffered breaches . These breaches have predominantly occurred at the end user level of public blockchains , where individuals have not maintained best security practices . Cryptocurrencies are traded on public blockchains , which secures them , but other associated information may be stored behind regular security protocols . Hacking a blockchain is still , fortunately , a theoretical possibility , but as with cloud-based data storage , it is also good to secure information as tightly and proactively as possible . Public versus Private Blockchains The first step in offering blockchain-enabled accounting and advisory services is the ability to actually download and use blockchain technology . Before this can occur , CPAs need to understand the differences between the public blockchain and the private blockchain . There is no one single blockchain ; rather , there are hundreds of different options available for individuals and businesses . The public blockchain , which supports the cryptocurrency Bitcoin , allows anyone to join by simply by downloading the software ( ) . Most organizations , however , do not appear to be choosing this option . CPAs would most likely opt for a private blockchain due to privacy and utility concerns . Exhibit 2 provides a basic illustration of how a private blockchain could be constructed and set up , with the organizer having access to both invitees ’ information and granting the CPA access to relevant data from the invited organizations . Exhibit 2 Simple Private Blockchain Private blockchains place restrictions on who can join the network , and examples of private blockchains can already be found in the marketplace . In addition to products currently produced by IBM and others , several other large corporations are already experimenting and using blockchain technology to improve supply chain performance , information , and reporting , including FedEx , Maersk , Wal-Mart , UPS , and British Airways . An additional benefit , from the perspective of the accounting profession , is that private blockchains allow different levels of access and editing to different users . Depending on what functionality the organizer wants to establish , the types of information stored and disseminated via the blockchain , and what levels of access different stakeholders require , private blockchains appear to be the most logical and business friendly option for organizations . Exhibit 3 shows some of the benefits . One of the biggest potential benefits is the reduction in time spent confirming and verifying information . Remember that as blocks are added to the blockchain and approved , each approved block of information is then posted for all network members to see . If the information on the blockchain has been approved , verified , and reviewed by network members , is there need for additional confirmation ? In that scenario , and especially as blockchain networks become more widely implemented , it is possible to see a future state when confirmations are either vastly reduced , or potentially automated altogether . Exhibit 3 Benefits of Blockchain to the CPA Profession Although most accounting processes have not been moved to blockchain platforms yet , as more business processes occur in the blockchain space , this is bound to change . So far , many of the organizations that have adopted blockchain are large companies , but this mirrors similar adoption patterns of other emerging technologies . One of the authors spoke extensively with Brett Shear of Balanc3 about the current state of accounting and the blockchain . Most users of Balanc3 to date are firms in the blockchain/cyber-currency space and not companies that have converted to blockchain from traditional accounting formats , but Shear expects this to change once accountants and auditors start working with blockchain events as part of an assurance process . Private blockchains offer business applications more suited for CPAs . Choosing Blockchain Software From a purely technical perspective , public blockchains may be worthy of additional analysis and consideration , but private blockchains offer business applications more suited for CPAs . The specifics of a private blockchain will vary , but upon downloading the appropriate software platform , and installing the technology on a server , the organization can sign up , write the code and protocol in alignment with its business need , and invite others to download the blockchain software and join the existing network . Several of the more popular blockchain options in the marketplace as of this writing include the following : Ethereum is a decentralized open source platform where interested parties may customize blockchain applications for smart contracts , or agreements that run exactly as programmed , without downtime , censorship , errors , fraud , or third-party oversight and intermediation . Ethereum enables users to negotiate loans , agreements , charters , wills , fund transfers , and other contractual matters without a third party , trustee , or counter-signer . The basic smart contract process begins by accessing the Ethereum platform , which is the gateway to accessing cryptoassets built on blockchain in addition to writing , enacting , and using smart contracts . The basic steps for getting started with Ethereum and other blockchain software discussed below can be found here : . The real value that CPAs can deliver is to bring businesses blockchain-enabled accounting , attest , and advisory services . One thing to keep in mind when considering Ripple is that it was designed for large financial services corporations ; therefore , it may not be an appropriate option for other businesses . If , however , Ripple does sound like a good fit , the setup process is relatively straightforward : Because Ripple is built to facilitate financial transactions , users are responsible for understanding and complying with regulations , including know-your-customer ( KYC ) and anti–money laundering ( AML ) rules . Factom is a blockchain platform primarily used to reduce the volume and complexity of paperwork associated with complicated legal transactions by allowing these documents to be published on this blockchain platform . There are two main offerings , Harmony and DLoc . Harmony provides a secure blockchain-based documentation storage platform that allows lenders to quickly assemble loan underwriting packages . It claims to reduce the burdens of review and assembly of documents for underwriting and litigation , ease the process of mergers and acquisitions by reducing the time required for review , and reduce the number of document errors occurring from duplications , anomalies , and missing information . DLoc is a document authentication and verification system that reliably authenticates any essential documents , including birth certificates , land titles , and medical records . Any business that issues vital records , contracts , and tax records can use blockchain technology and the trust of well-established cryptography standards for data protection and security . Hyperledger is an open source blockchain platform , complete with a graphic user interface ( GUI ) that makes using , experimenting , and building blockchain models possible for users even without technical expertise . Sponsored by the Linux foundation , it can also be used by practitioners , educators , and students to learn about blockchain in a real-world environment . Setting up a network or blockchain on Hyperledger is a relatively straightforward process that can be started by anyone with a computer and an Internet connection . It is important to remember that , although Hyperledger is supported by the Linux foundation and is certainly useful for experimenting and learning more about blockchain functionality , public blockchains may not be ideal for CPAs . Multichain is an open source off-the-shelf platform for the creation and use of private blockchains , internally or shared across permissioned organizations . It claims to resolve the key issues — privacy and control—hindering the use of blockchain by financial and other sector institutions . It is designed to ensure that a blockchain ’ s activity is only visible to permissioned participants , to introduce controls as to which transactions are permitted , and most importantly , to allow verification to take place securely without proof-of-work and its associated costs . Since the blockchain is private and the size of the chain is controlled by the permissioned users , latencies and burdens related to the size of the chain are easily resolved . Furthermore , the chain only includes events that relate to the users . It is available for Windows , Mac , and Linux , with a simple command line interface and application program interface ( API ) . How Blockchain Will Change the Profession Knowing how to set up different blockchain networks and platforms is an excellent skill to have , but the real value that CPAs can deliver is to bring businesses blockchain-enabled accounting , attest , and advisory services . To provide these services , however , CPAs should understand what the implications are , and provide examples of how blockchain will transform the profession , as shown in Exhibit 4 . Exhibit 4 Examples of Improved Accounting Processes using Blockchain Reconciliation . For CPAs working in industry , reconciling accounts and amounts can occupy a majority of staff and even supervisor time . Traditional reconciliations involve comparisons of book balances of information at an organization against external information , such as bank statements , documents provided by brokerages , or information generated by joint venture partners and affiliates . After acquiring and finalizing these different sources of information—which can be time consuming in and of itself—the inevitable differences will need to be identified and explained . In addition , the process is prone to error , and the final incremental value added via a routine reconciliation is usually minimal at best . In a blockchain-enabled accounting environment , information is readily available and continually confirmed by all network participants . Instead of having to be confirmed manually and provided by third parties or internal colleagues , the information can be exported out of the blockchain environment . Because all members of the blockchain network have access to the data uploaded and verified by fellow members in real time , the need for periodic reconciliations is greatly diminished . Saving this time allows CPAs to spend more time on higher-level advisory services , elevating the value added . Expansion of accounting function . Blockchain technology is clearly in the opening stages of development , and CPAs are just beginning to experiment with how to generate benefits . In addition to benefits derived from saving time and effort on reconciliations , ad hoc reporting , and closing the books , there are several additional benefits and applications CPAs should keep in mind . Establishing a single source of data internally Reducing paperwork Exhibit 5 illustrates how blockchain implementation connects directly to these challenges putting pressure on the accounting function . Exhibit 5 Benefits of Blockchain for the Accounting Process and the CPA Continuous auditing . One of the biggest criticisms of the profession is that a core component of the services offered to clients—audit and attest work—is greatly limited by two factors . First , despite some effort to conduct audits on an ongoing basis , the auditing process is a periodic event rather than a continuous cycle . Second , when an audit occurs , the eventual audit opinion is based on a sampling of entries , amounts , and other information . This creates a situation wherein not only do audits not reflect the rapidity and fluidity of contemporary business , but the audit opinion suffers from audit failures and a lack of audit efficiency . Even though audits are currently conducted via a sampling methodology , the disruption audits cause to business is significant because employees must assist auditors in gathering the necessary documentation for testing and other procedures . New and changing audit standards also tend to reduce efficiency . Blockchain-enabled auditing enhances the efficiency , effectiveness , and reliability of the evidence collection process . According to the PCAOB , audit evidence is “ all of the information used by the auditor in arriving at the conclusions on which the audit opinion is based ” [ Auditing Standards ( AS ) 1105 ] . The standards also dictate that this evidence should be sufficient , appropriate , and reliable and should be generated by certain procedures . These processes , such as confirmations and recalculations/reperformance , can be time consuming . Blockchain-enabled auditing enhances the efficiency , effectiveness , and reliability of the evidence collection process , as shown in Exhibit 6 . If there is a blockchain network set up between the auditor , the client , and client ’ s third parties , all of them possess customized access to the information . Data is verified and approved by the network as it is added ; once the information is validated via consensus , this data recording is immutable . With continuous data flows , all network participants can validate and receive real-time updates of transactions , and a batch process audit may not be necessary . The blockchain could provide automatic confirmations of payments , receivables , payables , and inventory , and confirmations could be automated out of the audit process . Furthermore , auditors would be able to examine 100 % of the transactions during the consensus process , thereby providing a higher level of assurance . Exhibit 6 Comparison of Traditional and Blockchain-Enabled Audit Procedures It should be noted that auditing 100 % of the transactions would likely lead to an expectation that the majority of material errors and frauds would be detected by any reasonably competent auditor . In addition , if an auditor joins the chain later in the process on a read-only basis , he could confirm the viability and design of the chain while vetting the network participants and the application controls established by all parties . Moving Forward Blockchain technology has the potential to revolutionize and disrupt the accounting profession in ways that even now are not entirely clear . What is clear , however , is that blockchain will have an impact on the business landscape . Accounting professionals need to adjust to this new business paradigm , both in how they interact with clients and colleagues and the level of service they provide . Taking into account the fact that this technology is still in its early stages , other potential questions come into play . What is blockchain ’ s time horizon ? Innovations in blockchain are occurring daily based on perceived business/social needs . Many businesses are studying its potential , with some sectors implementing it on a case-by-case basis ( e.g. , banking , mining , supply chain applications ) . During the next year , the authors expect to see more user-friendly applications as intuitive interfaces are developed and more use case studies emerge . Because accounting tells the story of business events , the accounting and auditing professions will likely engage with blockchain in the very near future . When will CPAs encounter it in daily practice ? It may be smaller firms that encounter blockchain use by their clients or that may be requested to provide blockchain-assisted accounting services , since small-to-medium-sized businesses that are not publicly listed are generally more flexible and able to adopt new technologies with greater agility . Although most if not all of the major accounting firms are studying blockchain or running pilot programs , most of the innovation is occurring on the advisory side . Traditional accounting and assurance services for public companies may be a bit slower to adopt blockchain due to latencies of size , regulations , and bureaucracy . For example , a small firm or business may start using Factom to immutably record a contract and its timestamp , while larger firms and their clients could undergo months of discussion and risk analysis before using blockchain , and even then on a pilot basis . Is widespread adoption still years away ? Given that the business world comprises many different sectors and entities with different feasibilities for blockchain use , blockchain could become more noticeable in some industries ( e.g. , banking , real estate , construction , government , mining , insurance , supply chain ) during the next year . In the next five years , the authors predict that the blockchain landscape will evolve significantly as a means of providing data integrity , security , and history , and that several professions will realize significant efficiencies with contract and transaction validations . Although most if not all of the major accounting firms are studying blockchain or running pilot programs , most of the innovation is occurring on the advisory side . What are the results of a costs/benefit analysis ? Hypothetically speaking , factors such as ease of use , decreased time for activities such as confirmations , and the verification of data quality all need to be addressed . This is clearly an area for future research and use-case analysis ; for example , from a forensic accounting perspective , if blockchain-enabled evidence were to be successfully accepted in a court case , that would provide a greater impetus towards reducing examination costs . What factors might change the equation ? The speed of blockchain acceptance for accounting and auditing is contingent on several key events : when an audit firm successfully audits a blockchain and passes PCAOB inspection , when businesses demonstrate successful use cases , when blockchain developers build more user-friendly interfaces , and when blockchain-secured evidence is accepted in a court of law . All of these instances could serve to validate blockchain as a securer of accounting and auditing evidence , in addition to enabling its ease of use . CPAs have adapted to technological changes before and will do so again the future . Professionals currently have an opportunity to leverage the advances in blockchain technology to elevate themselves , the services they provide , and the perception of the accounting and auditing profession at large .
The Reality of Virtual Currency I have been following the virtual currency ( VC ) debate and marketplace for some years now , and would like to share my observations as a person focused on economic realities , as well as my background in fraud investigations and computer science . Firstly , traditional money is backed up by a faith and credit in a government of some kind . Such a government could , for example , raise taxes to pay back debt . VC is backed up by the belief of participants in a marketplace that will retain its value . Second , the value of VC is still measured in terms of traditional currency , such as dollars or dinars—hence , VC relies on the conversion to traditional currency . Third , the history of fraud tells us that price swings in a marketplace are indicative of “ pump-and-dump ” schemes . Manipulation of the exchange rate from virtual currency to sovereign currency is thus rampant when earlier or larger participants “ cash out. ” Anonymity and thin trading slices make this scheme even harder to detect in real time . Fourth , money laundering can make use of the opacity of the VC marketplace and enable non-anonymous players to appear anonymous to everyone else . Thus , a synchronized transaction can mask the laundering ; it validates dirty money as a valid transaction . Finally , as expressed in a previous article in The CPA Journal ( “ Blockchain : The Making of a Simple , Secure Recording Concept , ” June 2017 , ) , from a distributed ledger perspective , VC has a systemic flaw : if and when more than 50 % of ledger custodians are controlled by a single entity , the underlying blockchain technology fails . This has already happened once , and there is no mathematical or even legal reason that it can not happen again . My conclusion : VC is a hope—not a plan—for a reliable currency .
Reporting Virtual Currency Transactions to the IRS Time May Be Running Out for Affected Taxpayers IRS Notice 2014-21 , issued on March 25 , 2014 , made it clear that the IRS would treat virtual currencies that can be converted into traditional currency as property for federal income tax purposes ( ) . This means that gain from the sale and exchange of virtual currency is subject to taxation . Given that many are attracted to virtual currency because of its anonymous nature , tax preparers should expect that individual clients might not volunteer information about virtual currency transactions at tax time . Recent events suggest , however , that the IRS is not sitting back and waiting for taxpayers to fully disclose their virtual currency activities . Failure to report such transactions may result in penalties and , potentially , criminal prosecution . On March 23 , 2018 , the IRS issued a reminder that income from virtual currency transactions is reportable ( “ IRS Reminds Taxpayers to Report Virtual Currency Transactions , ” ) . While the 2014 notice mentioned potential accuracy-related and information reporting penalties and noted that “ penalty relief may be available ” due to reasonable cause , it did not reference potential criminal penalties . The 2018 reminder states : Taxpayers who do not properly report the income tax consequences of virtual currency transactions can be audited for those transactions and , when appropriate , can be liable for penalties and interest . In more extreme situations , taxpayers could be subject to criminal prosecution for failing to properly report the income tax consequences of virtual currency transactions . Criminal charges could include tax evasion and filing a false tax return ( emphasis added ) . This change in the IRS ’ s position on virtual currency reporting should set off alarm bells for taxpayers who thought they could avoid reporting these transactions . It should also encourage CPAs to ask individuals about their virtual currency activities . IRS Efforts to Obtain Virtual Currency Users ’ Information Taxpayers should be mindful of the fact that the IRS has a number of effective enforcement tools available , such as the “ John Doe ” summons that , pursuant to Internal Revenue Code ( IRC ) section 7602 ( a ) , can be issued by the IRS only after approval by a district court . Such a summons allows the IRS to investigate the tax liability of a specific unidentified taxpayer or group of taxpayers . The John Doe summons has been used with great success in the IRS ’ s enforcement of undisclosed offshore bank accounts , starting with the summons issued to UBS in 2008 ( “ IRS to Receive Unprecedented Amount of Information in UBS Agreement , ” Aug. 19 , 2009 , ) . No doubt because of this success , the IRS is now using the John Doe summons in matters related to virtual currency . In 2016 , the IRS issued a John Doe summons to Coinbase , one of the world ’ s largest virtual currency exchanges , seeking the identities of all of its customers and account records for 2013 , 2014 , and 2015 . When Coinbase failed to comply with the summons , the IRS initially agreed to narrow the scope , then moved to compel disclosure . In support of its petition , the IRS submitted an affidavit from an IRS agent stating that it believes that virtual currency gains are not being reported , in part because only 800 to 900 taxpayers had filed an IRS Form 8949 in 2015 to report virtual currency gains or losses , while Coinbase had 5.9 million users [ U.S. v. Coinbase , 2017 WL 5890052 ( N.D. Cal . Nov. 28 , 2017 ) ( JSC ) ] . After Coinbase objected to the summons and a Coinbase customer moved to intervene and quash it , the court issued an order in November 2017 limiting the summons to only those customers of Coinbase who bought , sold , sent , or received more than $ 20,000 of bitcoin in any one year during 2013–2015 . Pursuant to the court ’ s order , Coinbase is required to turn over taxpayer identification number , name , date of birth , address , records of account activity , and all periodic statements of account or invoices relating to the narrowed class of customers . On February 23 , 2018 , Coinbase sent an e-mail to approximately 13,000 of its customers notifying them that it will be complying with the court order ( “ IRS Notification , ” ) . The IRS is therefore in the process of learning the identity of Coinbase customers who may not have properly reported their virtual currency transactions on their tax returns . Reporting Options Taxpayers who have received notification from Coinbase that their data is being turned over to the IRS should realize that they must notify their tax preparer of the situation . They should also consider filing amended returns to report their transactions in accordance with the IRS ’ s 2014 notice . While additional taxes may be due , these taxpayers may be able to avoid penalties if they can show reasonable cause for their failure to report . Taxpayers who engaged in unreported virtual currency transactions but are not affected by the Coinbase summons have several options available to them , which should be discussed with a tax professional . First , and most unlikely , in the case of a taxpayer whose failure to report virtual currency transactions is due to reasonable cause , filing qualified amended returns may be an option . In general , a qualified amended return is an amended return that is filed by a taxpayer before— A qualified amended return will not , however , help the taxpayer avoid fraud penalties with respect to fraudulent positions taken on the original return ( IRS Notice 2004-38 , ) . Accordingly , if there is any indication of fraud ( e.g. , the taxpayer chose not to inform the tax return preparer in response to a specific question about virtual currency ) , filing qualified amended returns would be a risky approach . Second , a taxpayer may be able to file amended returns pursuant to the Internal Revenue Manual ’ s ( IRM ) voluntary disclosure provisions ( IRM section . 9.11.9 ) . This is accomplished by submitting a letter from an attorney , providing amended returns that are complete and accurately report previously omitted legal source income , and offering to pay the tax , interest , and any penalties determined to be applicable by the IRS . While this is a simple process , it does not provide any specific penalty protection and does not result in the IRS issuing a closing agreement . Furthermore , even if the returns and payment are processed , the filing may still result in an audit or even a criminal investigation . Third , a taxpayer may be able to participate in the IRS ’ s formal domestic voluntary disclosure program ( IRM section 9.11.9 ) , thereby possibly eliminating the risk of penalties , including criminal prosecution . Sometimes referred to as a “ noisy disclosure , ” this is likely the best option for any taxpayer who the IRS may conclude filed a fraudulent return that failed to report virtual currency transactions . In order to initiate a domestic voluntary disclosure , the tax representative should fax a power of attorney along with the taxpayer ’ s name , date of birth , Social Security number , and address to the IRS Criminal Investigation Division ( CID ) . CID then will review its databases to determine whether or not the taxpayer is eligible to participate in the domestic voluntary disclosure ( i.e. , the disclosure is timely ) . If the taxpayer is precleared to participate , he must comply with IRM section 9.11.9 by submitting truthful and complete returns and agreeing to cooperate with the IRS . If the IRS accepts the voluntary disclosure , it will issue a Form 906 closing agreement setting forth the amount of tax , interest , and penalties due for the tax period at issue , which will bring an end to the process . Taxpayers who do not file amended returns , either because they are no longer eligible or because they decline professional advice to do so , still may be able to avail themselves of certain arguments to try to avoid civil penalties . If , for example , taxpayers disclosed to their accountant that they were involved in virtual currency transactions , and the accountant did not inquire further or advise the taxpayers to make full disclosure , the taxpayers may be able to assert that they relied in good faith on their accountant ’ s advice . Since the IRS did not take a public position on the taxation of virtual currency until early 2014 , it would be difficult for the IRS to penalize failure to report virtual currency transactions before that time . The IRS will , however , undoubtedly take a contrary position . In addition , IRS Notice 2014-21 is simply the IRS ’ s position regarding the taxation of virtual currency ; while it is prudent to comply with that notice , it does not have the force of law . As a result , taxpayers with unreported virtual currency transactions may be able to argue that the IRS ’ s position is wrong and different tax principles should apply to this new technology . After all , when the tax law is uncertain or ambiguous , a taxpayer may have reasonable cause for failure to properly report in accordance with an unclear law [ see Treasury Regulations section 1.6664-4 ( b ) ( 1 ) ] . A taxpayer who knowingly takes a position contrary to published IRS guidance may , however , want to file a Form 8275 with her return , as positions that have a reasonable basis and are adequately disclosed are not subject to substantial understatement penalties [ IRC section 6662 ( d ) ( 2 ) ( B ) ( ii ) ; Treasury Regulations section 6662-4 ] . Some commentators have suggested that taxpayers can take advantage of the IRS ’ s Offshore Voluntary Disclosure Program ( OVDP ) to report previously unreported virtual currency transactions . The purpose of the OVDP is for taxpayers to report previously unreported foreign bank accounts and earnings from those accounts . The IRS ’ s position to date has been that taxpayers do not have to report virtual currency on FinCEN Form 114 , Report of Foreign Bank and Financial Accounts ( Allison Bennett , “ IRS : No Bitcoin Reporting on FBARs for This Filing Season , but Future Changes Possible , ” BNA.com , June 5 , 2014 , ) . Accordingly , the OVDP does not seem to be available to a taxpayer who is solely reporting virtual currency transactions . The taxpayer may also have an unreported foreign bank account that has been used to receive funds related to virtual currency transactions ; in such a case , the OVDP may be available to report not only the existence of and income from the foreign bank account but also the previously unreported virtual currency transactions . Virtual Currency , Real Consequences Since 2014 , the IRS has made clear its position that the sale and exchange of virtual currency is subject to tax , and any grace period for reporting such transactions appears to be coming to a close . Taxpayers and their professional advisors should take action to correct any previous nonreporting of virtual currency transactions in a way that will mitigate potential penalties . The clock is ticking , and the IRS ’ s patience for nonreporting seems to be running out .
Ten Trends that CPAs Will See in 2018 2018 is here . Looking ahead to what will almost certainly be an eventful year , here are 10 trends that , in this author ’ s opinion , will affect the CPA profession the most . State Nexus/Sales Tax Complexities Will Increase More and more businesses are starting to sell and perform services online , which causes nexus and sales tax to become big issues for those businesses . Automating sales tax can be difficult , as each product or service sold might be taxed differently by different states . This complexity will only increase , as the federal government provides less and less support to states , which will have to find new ways to raise revenue . Artificial Intelligence and Automation Will Take Hold Minor levels of artificial intelligence and automation already exist in bookkeeping and tax programs , but the profession is still only scratching the surface of using technology to improve efficiency and provide analytical data that help practitioners and clients make better business decisions . In 2018 , tax programs will become smarter , starting to link directly to the large payroll companies and some brokerage houses in order to automate parts of the individual tax return . The Cloud Will Dominate Less than 30 % of small businesses use cloud-based accounting software ; most accounting firms still have most of their programs house on an internal or hosted server . Still , every year draws the profession farther away from the server and closer to a completely cloud-based software as a service ( SAAS ) model . This will accelerate in 2018 , as more small businesses migrate to the cloud and the big tax software companies ( e.g. , CCH , Thomson ) hopefully release fully functional cloud-based software . Individual clients will also start to demand to receive their documents electronically . Compilations and Reviews Will Decline ( and Audits Are Next ) With the rise of cloud-based , real-time accounting , the value a traditional compilation or review provides is practically nil . The only reason a client needs a compilation or review these days is to give to a bank or to raise money . Managing a business off of a compilation is dead . Accounting firms are starting to provide real-time data to their clients so they can make quicker decisions . They will start relying much more heavily on nontraditional data points and KPIs to help their businesses make better decisions . Tax Return Compliance Will Be Commoditized Clients who only want a tax return prepared with no advice are turning away from CPAs , especially on the low end . The low-end compliance tax return will be commoditized . This will become even more accelerated in 2019 , with the doubling of the standard deduction . CPAs will need to become more adept at providing business-based advice and tax planning services . Tax Planning Will Be King As the newly passed tax law takes effect , with all of its added complexities , businesses will want significant tax planning for the years ahead . No one knows how long the new provisions will last ; depending upon what happens in the 2018 and 2020 elections , it might not be for long . Traditional CPA Firms Will Increase Nontraditional Acquisitions CPA firms , feeling pressure to change their core business as compliance continues to become less profitable , will start acquiring non-CPA firms in order to bring on nontraditional services faster . This will include tech companies , investment companies , trust service , insurance , and possibly even lending . The value of a traditional firm that only does tax and audits will continue to decrease . CPA Firms Will Get Rid of Their CPA Designation The value of being a “ CPA firm ” is becoming too costly and burdensome , especially for employers who hire remote workers across multiple states . State CPA boards are slow to change , and most firms are making the choice to call themselves accounting firms and not worry about the CPA designation and the complexities it brings , especially with the rise of nontraditional CPA services . Crypto-Currency Will Become a Tax Problem The last six months have seen a rise in people investing in cryptocurrencies , including bitcoin . This will become a nightmare for CPAs in 2018 , as there is no tracking or reporting to the IRS for the gains and losses . Practitioners will need to begin asking the question , “ Did you buy or sell Bitcoin last year ? ” Value-Priced Billing Will Gain Steam 2018 is going to be the tipping year for value-priced billing . Firms are starting to realize that fixed-price fees are a better way to bill clients than the hourly standard . As more and more baby boomers retire and younger generations take over , this shift will only increase . The timesheet is next on the chopping block after billable hours , but the required shift in the mindset of managers will take a lot longer to take catch on in the accounting world .